current affairs for capf, rbi grade b

January

1.  Mou between india and usa for net zero carbon emission for railways

2. Rangpo station inaugurated in Sikkim

3. iron deposits found at karauli , rajasthan


7. highest railway bridge has been constructed on chenab river.


9.  UAE recently dropped from FATF financial crime list

10. Indian Navy's Fast Attack Craft INS Kabra arrived at Colombo, Sri Lanka on 08 Jan 24   // defence

11. Sue Redfern will become the first ICC-appointed female neutral umpire to officiate in a bilateral series during the upcoming WT20I between Australia and South Africa. This decision aims to promote gender diversity in officiating roles.17 Jan 2024

13 Andhra Pradesh 2nd state to do caste based census after bihar
14. The Viraat Ramayan Mandir is a Hindu temple complex under construction in Bihar's East Champaran district. It is being built to be the world's largest Ramayan temple and is expected to be completed by 2025




***************March 2024

1.Eunectes Akiyama - largest python found on earth

2. expert committee for great Indian bustard

3. bugun tribe(west kameng district AP) donated land to forest department

4. noctis volcano on mars

5. kalam 250 - skyroot aerospace

6. pushpak - india RLV - relaunch land vehicle
7. recently neolithic child burial site has been discovered at Chettimedu Pathur village, approximately 77 kilometres from Chennai, TN

8. simon harris youngest PM of Ireland.

9. 14th president of Pakistan - asif ali jardari

10. Agalega island present in Mauritius.


12. China announced new territorial sea basin in the gulf of Tonkin(originally part of Vietnam).

13. Maharashtra first state to buy land in J & K.


***The 'PM-SURAJ' national portal aims to uplift the most marginalized sections of society and provide credit assistance to one lakh entrepreneurs from disadvantaged communities.
  --It is implemented by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and its departments.

*** NAMASTE
--The NAMASTE Scheme is a central Sector Scheme formulated in 2022, by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (MoSJE) and the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA).

--It aims to ensure safety, dignity, and sustainable livelihoods for urban sanitation workers.


*** UNNATI 2024  - by ministry of commerce and industry 

16- Prabha verma received Saraswati samman in 2023 for her novel 'Roudra sathwikam'

17. Suman kumari has become first snipper of BSF.     // defence

18- Indian navy is set to commison MH 60 R seahawk helicopter at INS Garuda , Kochi     // defence

19. First installation of artificial coral reefs in Puducherry

20. Second installation of artificial coral reefs in worli. tri service defence station in Mumbai

21. Zimbabwe declared state of disaster due to devastating drought induced by El Nino

22. National emergency at Sierra Leone due to drugs

23. india gained control over Sittwe port in Myanmar

24. 2024 Ocean Decade conference was held in Barcelona

25. india defence export increased by 32.5 % in FY 2023-24 , 21083 rs

-- sumit nagal - tennis

26 - Calisto is Jupiter 2nd largest moon

27- Bharat biotech started clinical trial of MTB vaccine for tuberculosis 

28- Originating from the Kutch region of Gujarat, Ajrakh sarees received GI tag

29- Jaapi from assam and assamese dhol also received GI tag

30 Cyclone Remal , name given by oman , remal means sand.

31- cyclone Hidaya - hit Tanzania - name given by France

32- AK 203 - assault riffle and IGLA very short range air defense system india procured  by Russia

33. Highest polling both in Maharashtra - Raireshwar fort

34. This specialized firefighting technique involves suspending a container beneath a helicopter, filling it from a water source, and then releasing it over the fire zone. Bambi Buckets are vital for tackling wildfires in inaccessible areas.

35- Venezuela first country to lose all its glaciers humbolt glacier(La corona) in Venezuela has melted , Venezuela and monacco added in FATF grey list

36 - 'Cyril ramphosa' elected president of South Africa

37- 'A fly on the RBI wall; book authored by Alpana Kilawala
38 - Kheer Bhawani mela was held in J & K

39-  Indian farmer- Land hero award by united nation is 'Siddhesh Sakore' - 17 June - world desertification and drought day

40- Bharat - IORA Cruise Tourism conference - 2024 in Delhi

41- 'Mission Nischay' to curb demand and supply of drugs by Punjab Police 

42- Gandhi sagar wildlife sanctuary in Madhya Pradesh.

43- Deep ocean mission by ministry of Earth sciences.
-- Rudram 2 anti radiation missile tested by DRDO           // defence

**World earth day- 22 April - planet vs plastic

***world  heritage day - 18 April - discover and experience diversity

***world  health day - 7 April - my health my right

***global liveability index by Economics intelligence unit

***global peace index by Institute for Economics and peace . India's rank in the 2024 Global Peace Index (GPI) is 116th out of 163 countries.Iceland -1

44- Kolkata high court orders 1 % reservation for transgender.

45- keir starmer new pm of uk replacing Rishi shunak.

46- 

47- Denmark first country to impose livestock emission tax.

48- Challa Srinivasulu appointed new chairman of SBI

49 AI preparedness index by IMF- india rank is 72 , Singapore on top , released by IMF   //index

50- Global AI summit -2023 organised by Ministry of IT and electronics.

51-Lyon masters chess championship - 2024 award by Vishwanathan Anand.
52- NTR Bharosha pension scheme started by Andhra Pradesh.     // yojana

  - Old Age Persons, Widow, Toddy Tappers, Weavers, Single women, Fishermen, ART (PLHIV) Persons , Traditional Cobblers,Transgender and Dappu Artists to Rs.4000/- per month
-  Disabled Persons and Multi Deformity Leprosy Persons to Rs.6000/- per month.

- Fully Disable Persons to Rs.10,000/- per month,Chronic diseases viz., BilateralElephantiasis-Grade 4, Kidney, liver and heart transplant,CKDU not on Dialysis CKD Serum Creatinine of >5 mg, CKDUNot on Dialysis CKD estimated GFR ml, CKDU Not onDialysis CKD Small contracted kidney to Rs 10000/- Per Month.


a) Ladli behan yojana : This scheme was launched in 2023 by the Madhya Pradesh Government. Under the scheme, the government will provide Rs.1250 to women every month.


b) Sumangala yojana : 25000 rs for girl education

c) Lek Ladki yojana : Maharastra , upto 1 lac in different phases.

d) The following financial assistance will be provided to eligible women beneficiaries under Indira Gandhi Mahila Samman Nidhi Yojana :-
Financial Assistance of Rs. 1,500/- per Month.

e) Mukhyamantri Ladki Bahin Yojana - Maharstra - The annual family income should be less than ₹2.5 lakh. Women who are employed in government jobs or who pay income tax are not eligible for this scheme. 
- The scheme is applicable to women aged between 21 and 65 years.

Monthly Financial Assistance: Eligible women receive ₹1,500 every month.

Free LPG Cylinders: Three free LPG gas cylinders are provided annually.

Educational Support: Fee waivers for poor girls belonging to Other Backward Classes (OBC) and Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) for higher education admissions in colleges.

Eligibility: The scheme is available to women aged 21 to 65, including married, widowed, divorced, abandoned, and destitute women. 

f) The Maiya Samman Yojana is a scheme introduced by the Jharkhand government, aimed at supporting women, particularly mothers, by providing them with financial assistance. 1000 rs per month . The applicant should be a female.The applicant should be a permanent resident of Jharkhand. The applicant's age should be between 21-49 years.

g) The Pradhan Mantri Vanbandhu Kalyan Yojana (PMVKY), launched on October 28, 2014.
  - target the upliftment and inclusion of India’s tribal communities, who represent 8.9% of the population
  - budget allocation of ₹26,135.46 crore from 2021-2026

h) PM Vidyalaxmi Scheme- Provides collateral-free, guarantor-free education loans to meritorious students.Outlay ₹3,600 crore allocated for 2024-25 to 2030-31.
-Loan Amount and Credit Guarantee: Students can avail loans up to ₹7.5 lakh, with a 75% credit guarantee for defaults, providing banks with security in loan disbursement.

-Interest Subvention: Students with a family income of up to ₹8 lakh, not availing other government scholarships, will receive a 3% interest subvention on loans up to ₹10 lakh during the moratorium period.

i) Union Minister Dr. Virendra Kumar Launches 'Shilp Samagam Mela 2024' and Unveils ‘TULIP’(Traditional Artisans’ Upliftment Livelihood Programme)- Platform           //yojana

j) Grihalakshmi Yojana - Karnataka - 1000 rs 

k) Mahtari vandana Yojana - Chhatisgarh  - 1000rs per month under DBT - 21 years above age.

l) Mukhya Mantri Sukh Shiksha Yojana- Himachal Pradesh- "support vulnerable women and parents of disabled children. The scheme aims to aid in the education and well-being of these children". Rs 53.21 crore has been allocated for the scheme for the financial year 2024-25. Eligible beneficiaries include children of widows, destitute women, divorced women, and parents of disabled children with an income under Rs 1 lakh per year. Eligible parents of children under 18 will receive Rs 1,000 per month for educational, nutritional, and health expenses. Support is provided for higher education and vocational courses.

m) PM Ji-VAN yojana(Jaiv Indhan vataran anukool fasal awashesh nivaran) extended till 2028-29 , approved further investment of 1969 Cr to provide remuneration to farmers for residue. Nodal ministry is Pteroleum and GAs.

53- India has become first country to prepare checklist of wildlife - 104561 species.

54- Ahom moidam(mound of grave) included in world heritage list, The Moidams of Assam, the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom Dynasty, have been included in the cultural category of the UNESCO World Heritage Site list.


55- Parbati-kalisindh-Chambal project agreement signed by Mp and rajasthan.

56- Gagan narag (shooter , bronze in 2012 olympics) 'chef de mission' of paris Olympic 2024, 

motto-  Games wide open

Mascot - the Phryges

-- 33rd edition of olympics
-- pV sindhu and sharat kamal flag bearer(opening caremony)
-- Shiva keshavan deputy chef de mission
-- manu bhakar and PR sreejesh flag bearer(closing caremony)

-- India rank is 71(tota1 6 medal 1 silver and 5 bronze ) in medal tally

Olymics 2028 - Los Angeles

new sports will be added- Baseball , cricket ,Flag football(for first time), Lacrose , Squash(for first time) 

- 2034 winter Olympic and paralympic at Salt Lake city.

57- AI tool 'Gemini' launched by Google in India.

58- Crocodile Consertvation project mark 50 years of completion started from 'Bhitarkarnika national park ' in 1975

 Bhitarkarnika national park in odisha - a Ramsar site

59- Bonn Climate conference 2024 was held in Germany , COP 29 organised in Baku, Azerbaijan in November 2024

60- energy transition index-published by world economic forum - india rank 63  , Sweden first // index 


may & June CA

1- 112th labour conference held at Geneva, Switzerland in 2024.
2- Pm Modi inaugurated new campus of Nalanda university(world heritage society).

3- 18th Loksabha - Protem speaker was Bhartruhari Mahtab(MP from orrissa) - president appoints him and administer oath to him

4- Wadhawan Port project - in Maharastra State - a greenfield project

5-  'CV chandrashekhar' ,padmabhusan awardee, passed away recently was associated with 'Bharatnathyam'

6- 'Ambubachi Mela' organised at kamakhya devi temple on 'Nilanchal Hills'. 

7-  'Srinagar' given world crafts city by world crafts council.

8- 'Kozhikode' has been given Unesco City of Literature.

9- India started e-medical visa service with Bangladesh.

10- First airport to start FTI-TTP is Indira Gandhi airport.

11- 'Khalubar war memorial' is located at Aryan valley of Ladakh.

12- 'Mark rutte' former PM of Netherland appointed as the Secretary General of NATO.

13- 'Paraguay' became 100th member of the international solar alliance.

14- India's First Chadwick House: CAG Museum Opened at 'Shimla', CAG - article 178. summer retreat of president at Shimla and winter retreat at Rastrapati Nilayam located at Hyderabad , Telangana.

15- Bannerghatta Biological National park is located in Karnataka- first leopard safari.

16- Pen pinter prize 2024 - given to Arundhati roy for literature.

17- 108 feet Nadprabhu kempegowda (statue of prosperity) in Bengaluru. Nadprabhu kempegowda was governor(feudatories ) under Vijaynagara empire.

  -- city of bengaluru was founded by him.

18- Claudia Sheinbaum elected as first female president of Mexico.

19- mithun or gayal is state animal of arunachal and hornbill is state bird of arunachal and kerala.

20- 'Dar es salaaam' port is located in Tanzaniya , Adani group has signed 30 years agreement with this port. 

21- In 2023-24 india has received highest FDI from singapore. 2nd highest from mauritius , 3rd usa

22- Maguni charan kunar recently passed away is associate with puppetry art.

23- Host country of world environment day in 2024 is Saudi Arabia. theme was  'Land. Our Future. We are #GenerationRestoration'.

24- 'Halla Tomasdottir' has been elected president of Iceland.

25- 'Mount Canlanon' erupted recently is located in Philippines.

26- 'Oleg Kononenko' a Russian cosmonaut became first person to complete 1000 days in space.

27- A new species of Blue ant - Paraperatrechina blue has been found in Arunachal Pradesh

28 - President of 79th session of the UN general assembly is 'Philemon Yang' is former PM of cameroon.

29- 'Japan' has launched currency with 3d hologram to stop counterfeiting

30- 'Nagi Bird Santuary'  and 'Nakti Bird Santuary'  is Ramsar sites from Jamui district of bihar. total 82 Ramsar sites in india now , 3rd in bihar

31- Enviromental performance index - india rank is 176 out of 180 countries -published by Yale University   //index
     -- top  5 countries Estonia, Luxembourg, Germany, Finland and the United Kingdom, 
32- 'Carlos Alcaraz' won French open 2024 from spain. 

2024  Us open -women singles tittle - Aryna Sabalenka
 2024 US Open men's singles champion is Jannik Sinner

33- Prem singh Tamang became CM of Sikkim.

34- Gender Gap index 2024- india rank is 129 - published by world Economy forum , Iceland number 1.     // index

35- Highest Voter turnout in Assam

36 - Anamika Rajeev - first Helicopter pilot in Indian Navy

37- Jimex 2024 - naval exercise between india and Japan in yoshuka Japan.

38 - G7 summit-2024  at Italy

39- 'Arjun Erigaisi' associated with Chess, no-1 chess player from Telangana

40- Ashrikandi Terracotta- from assam given GI tag

41-  National Kho kho championship winner - Maharastra

42-  World's first nuclear energy summit at Belgium.

43- Manmohan singh autobiography - 'Changing India'

44- 'Ashdod port'  in Israel located on Mediterranean cost

45- CAR-T cells therapy related to  cancer.

46- West Nile Fever cases in Kerala , issue alert on that recently by mosquite culex pipiens.

47- AI spokeperson Victoria shi launched in Ukraine

48- Kinmen island located in pacific ocean , part of Taiwan.

49- Laurence WOng recently appointed as Singapore PM

50- World Hydrogen Summit 2024 in Netherland , objective to promote hydrogen as clean energy

51- TAK-003 prequalified WHO vaccine for Dengue.

52- Robert Fico PM of SLovakia

53- 'Mount Ibu' volcano erupted recently is located in Indoneia.

54- Kairos by 'Jenny Erpenbeck', translated by Michael Hofmann, has been named the winner of the International Booker Prize 2024.

55- 'Saga Dawa' Buddhist Festivals held in Sikkim in Tsuk La Thang monastery.

56- 'Sheetal  Devi' has won the world archery award.

57- Arvind Panagaria Chairman of 16th Finance commission.

58- Fist girl military school at Vrindavan in UP.

59- Chinnar wildlife sanctuary located in Kerala

60- Rejupave  Technology - Road Construction

61- Jaywan cards - credit and debit card of UAE  

-Jaywan cards are part of the UAE’s first national Domestic Card Scheme established through an agreement between Al Etihad Payments, the payment processor owned by the Central Bank of the UAE, and NPCI International Payments Limited (NIPL) of India.

62. Indian Navy's indigenous Stealth Frigate INS Shivalik arrived at Yokosuka, Japan to participate in the bilateral Japan – India Maritime Exercise 2024 (JIMEX 24). This is the eighth edition of JIMEX, since its inception in 2012.

63. Eight Indian Rafale fighter jets, accompanied by two IL-78 air-to-air refuellers and three C-17 Globemaster-III strategic airlift aircraft, are poised to participate in the prestigious multi-national 'Red Flag' exercise in Alaska, USA.        // defence

64. Exercise SHakti - Joint army exercise between india and Francce concluded at Umroi Meghalaya.

       
PM SVANidhi scheme- for urban vendors , micro finance scheme loan upto 50,000 , max tenure 36 months. MP is best performing state in that followed by Assam.

PM Mudra loans , limit increased to 20 lacs

PM JDY scheme

National Research Foundation(statutory body): NRF is a proposed entity that will replace the Science and Engineering Research Board of India (SERB) and catalyse and channel interdisciplinary research for accelerating India’s ambitious development agenda, through impactful knowledge creation and translation.

-- The NRF will be presided by the Prime Minister and consist of 10 major directorates, focusing on different domains of science, arts, humanities, innovation and entrepreneurship.

-- The NRF will have an 18-member board with eminent Indian and international scientists, senior government functionaries and industry leaders.
-- The NRF will be registered as a society and have an independent secretariat.

ROOFTOP solarization and muft bijli in budget 2024- 300 units per year

// July 2024  CA

1. INS delhi was awarded best ship of eastern fleet  // defence
2. INS shiwalik participated in Rim Pac exercise , led by US navy ,world’s largest international maritime exercise, being held in Hawaii.   // defence

3. Zorawar light tank developed by DRDO and Larsen and Toubro , named after general zorawar singh , maximum take off weight 25 tones.
4. INS tabar visited Hamburg , Germany                                    //defence
5. 46th session of Unesco world heritage committe at Bharat Mandapam New Delhi , tagline 'sah nau yasha(may our glory glow together) '

6 
7 Kerala top rank in the NITI Ayog's SDG index 2023-24
8 Bengaluru inaugurated first underground metro line , the aqua line
9 IAF weapon system school inaugurated at Hyderabad        //defence
10 IIA (Indian institute of Astrophysics)  developed new tool for the Thirty meter telescope(TMT) project
11. Namo Drone Didi scheme -- 15000 self help group - it is administered by ministry of agriculture and farmer welfare. outlay of Rs 1,261 crore.

12. Divya kala mela and divya kala shakti event in Bhubaneshwar
13. Chairman of the 'Colombo Process'  is India

14. Oldest cave painting has been discovered at Indonesia(sulavesi island)
15. 41000 years old ostrich nest has been found in Andhra Pradesh.
16. Vijay Amritraj (tennis) is first asian men to be inducted in International tennis hall of fame.

17. Chagos archipelago - Mauritius
18. Jia rai is the youngest and fastest para swimmer to cross English channel
19. Paul kagame 4th consecutive president of Rwanda

20. Dr Arvind chairman of 16th finance commission.

21. Main objective of e-Sankhyiki portal is 'to establish a comprehensive data management and sharing system' by ministry of statistics
22. Primary focus of NITI Gearshift challenge if Freight transportation.
23 Bajaj auto launched first CNG motorcycle.
24 Mount etna located at Italy.
25 MeDevIS online platform launched by WHO.
26  Russia's highest national award "The Order of St. Andrew the Apostle” conferred on Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi.
27 Axiom Mission 4 (Ax-4) is the fourth private astronaut mission to the International Space Station by NASA and Axiom company. Two Indian astronaut will be sent in ISS. shubhanshu Shukla and Prasanth Balakrishnan nair.
28 UP has highest number of unorganized workers as per survey
29 Roshni Nadar Malhotra , chairperson of HCL give Knight of the Legion of Honor award by France.
30 NABARD launched an integrated tribal development programme in the Kulathupuzha grama panchayat  marking its first initiative in Kollam(Kerala).

31 Gautam gambhir new coach of indian cricket team.
32 Dhruv Sitwala won men's billiard championship 2024.
33 Best agricultural state award to Maharastra, and best horticulture state to Nagaland.
34 Lebanon Israel- Blue lines demarcated by Un in 2001.

35 This initiative is part of the Vriksharopan Jan Abhiyan-2024 program. The Uttar Pradesh Forest Department is responsible for implementing the scheme. The program aims to establish 'Mitra Van' in 35 districts that share a border with other states, a Union Territory, or Nepal. 

36 The 10th BRICS Parliamentary Forum was held in St. Petersburg on 11–12 July. Om Birla lead it .

37. Recently, the members of Colombo Security Conclave (CSC)  India, Sri Lanka, the Maldives and Mauritius signed a Charter and a memorandum of understanding, for the establishment of the CSC secretariat in Colombo. formed in 2011 .Bangladesh was absent and Seychelles participated as an observer state. 

38. An Indian Air Force (IAF) contingent is participating in Exercise Pitch Black 2024 which is scheduled to be conducted from 12 July 24 to 02 August 24 in Australia. started in 1981 , biennial multilateral exercise.    // defence

39 the growth rate of new job creation in India accelerated to 6 per cent in FY24 from 3.2 per cent recorded in the previous year

40 Tata power solar system has launched Ghar ghar initiative from 'varanasi'

41   India ranks 4th in renewable energy production capacity, 165% growth YOY. Rajasthan , Gujarat , Karnataka , maharastra , TN top 5 states.

42 Parvat Prahar Exercise is a 20 day long exercise routine conduced by Indian Army to undertake disengagement from Patrolling Point 15 in eastern Ladakh //defence

43. Kargil war:The turning point book authored by MB rabindranath

44. Palitana, in Gujarat's Bhavnagar, became the world's first city where non-veg is illegal after Jain monk protests closed 250 butcher shops.

45  Indian badminton star PV Sindhu is the brand ambassador for tobacco control

46  Kareena Kapoor brand ambassador of UNICEF.

47 Kami Rita Sherpa broke his previous record. A Nepali sherpa guide topped the summit of Mount Everest for a record 30th time on Wednesday, an official said, his second ascent in 10 days.22 May 2024

48 India ranks fifth in the world for the 1350 patents of Generative AI (GenAI). 


49 The Praemium Erasmianum Foundation has awarded the Erasmus Prize 2024 to the Indian writer 'Amitav Ghosh'. He receives the prize for his passionate contribution to the theme 'imagining the unthinkable', in which an unprecedented global crisis – climate change – takes shape through the written word.

50. Recently, India has decided to endorse and approve the Biodiversity Beyond National Jurisdiction (BBNJ) Agreement also called High Seas Treaty. 

  -This global agreement is designed to safeguard high seas marine biodiversity through collaboration at international level and it will operate within the framework of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).

  - According to the 1958 Geneva Convention on the High Seas, parts of the sea that are not included in the territorial waters or the internal waters of a country are known as the high seas.
- It is the area beyond a country’s Exclusive Economic Zone (that extends up to 200 nautical miles from the coastline) and till where a nation has jurisdiction over living and non-living resources.

- Ministry of Earth science will oversee its implementation in India.

51. NASA transmitted Missy Elliott's song “The Rain (Supa Dupa Fly)” to Venus on July 12, 2024: 
  - DAVINCI and VERITAS are NASA missions to study Venus, Earth's closest planetary neighbor: 

52 The 2024 International Maritime Organization (IMO) Award for Exceptional Bravery for Red Sea rescue was awarded to two sets of nominees:
- Captain Avhilash Rawat and the crew of the oil tanker Marlin Luanda
- Captain Jorge Fernando Galaviz Fuentes and the crew of the tugboat Pemex Maya

53. India has made significant gains in forest area, adding 266,000 hectares annually from 2010 to 2020, ranking third globally behind China and Australia, according to a recent FAO(food and agricultural organisation) report.

54. In a heartwarming celebration of linguistic and cultural ties between India and Nepal, Dr. Usha Thakur has been honoured with the 12th Vishwa Hindi Samman.
55. 12th World Hindi conference was held in Fiji in 2023.
56. Recently it has found that a new banking malware called ‘Snowblind’ is targeting Android users to steal banking credentials.
   - Snowblind is a new type of Android banking malware designed to steal banking credentials by bypassing security features. mostly active in south east asia.

57. Union Minister Dr. Jitendra Singh recently inaugurated Asia’s inaugural health research-related Pre-clinical Network Facility at Faridabad’s Translational Health Science & Technology Institute (THSTI). This facility, selected by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), is notable as Asia’s first and the 9th globally to handle BSL3 pathogens.

58 13th edition of India- Thailand joint military Exercise MAITREE.The exercise is scheduled to be conducted from 1st to 15th July 2024 at Fort Vachiraprakan in Tak Province of Thailand. started in 2006.

59. The European Space Agency recently announced that its new Ramses(Rapid Apophis Mission for Space Safety) spacecraft may accompany the asteroid Apophis before and after its safe, albeit rather close, pass of Earth.

60 Amit shah launched e-Evidence, nyay Setu , Nyay Shruti and e-summons app for 3 new criminal laws at Chandigarh.

61. In the 2024 Henley Passport Index, India ranks 83rd, allowing Indian passport holders to travel visa-free to 58 countries. Singapore first 
 
62. Polaris dawn mission - first commercial spacewalk by falcon 9 rocket.

63 Vietnam PM visit to india : 

- Credit Line Extension: India will extend a USD 300 million credit line to Vietnam to support its military security and development projects.
- The inauguration of an Army Software Park in Nayachang, funded by an Indian grant, and increased cooperation on terrorism and cyber security were highlighted.
- MoUs Signed: Six Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) were signed, covering various areas including Agricultural Research, Customs capacity building, Law and justice, Radio & television, and Traditional medicines.
- Vietnam welcomed Indian investments in IT, manufacturing, textiles, semiconductors, and renewable energy.
- Digital Payment Connectivity: The PM of India announced that the central banks of both countries reached an agreement to establish digital payment connectivity, enhancing financial transactions between the two nations.

- Trade and Economic Goals: Vietnam proposed raising annual bilateral trade to USD 20 billion from the current USD 14.8 billion.

- Vietnam also joined the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI), an organization in which India is permanent co-chair

- India and Vietnam have partnered to develop the National Maritime Heritage Complex (NMHC) in Lothal, Gujarat

64. Sanjay Shukla is the Managing Director (MD) of the National Housing Bank (NHB).

65. India's first submerged museum inaugurated at Delhi by cultural minister Gajendra singh shekhawat.

66. World's first stamp on Lord Rama by Laos country.
67. Dhirendra Ojha is the current Director General of the Press Information Bureau (PIB). He was appointed in July 2024. 

68. Uttar Pradesh (UP), the state government has passed the draft for the Uttar Pradesh Nodal Investment Region for Manufacturing (Construction) Area Bill (NIRMAN)-2024.

- Special Investment Regions (SIRs) are supposed to be set up all over UP by the NIRMAN-2024 bill.

- Gujarat , Rajasthan and Karnataka already adopted this same concept

- A Memorandum of Understanding between the India Trade Promotion Organization (ITPO) and Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSME) for creating a good environment for business was signed at the same time as the NIRMAN-2024 bill

- Large convention centers are being built in Lucknow and Varanasi to make MSME more visible and promote local output.
  
69. Tamil literature, renowned author Sivashankari has been selected as the recipient of the highly esteemed Dr. C. Narayana Reddy National Literary Award.
 - cash prize 5 laks

70. The Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN) is a fund by the Government of India to improve telecommunications services in rural, remote, and urban areas. The DBN was formerly known as the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF). 

71. India's first integrated agri-export facility is being built at the Jawaharlal Nehru Port (JNPA) in Mumbai: 

72. Rajasthan became first state to adopt 10 year action plan for road safety.

73. Asadhi Bij , Kutchi New year , in 2nd Shukla of asadha month.

74. 'DURBAR HALL' AND 'ASHOK HALL' RENAMED AS 'GANATANTRA MANDAP' AND 'ASHOK MANDAP' RESPECTIVELY by President of India.

75. The Anand Marriage Act of 1909 is a law in India that recognizes the Sikh wedding ceremony, also known as Anand Karaj, as a valid marriage. The act was passed by the British Imperial Legislative Council to respect the Sikh community's customs and practices. The act's main features include: 
- The act has been extended to several parts of India, including Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Tripura, Vindhya Pradesh, and Dadra and Nagar Haveli.

76. The 2024 Gulbenkian Prize for Humanity was awarded to three winners:
- Andhra Pradesh Community Managed Natural Farming (APCNF): A state government initiative that uses natural farming techniques 
- SEKEM: An Egyptian organization that promotes organic and biodynamic farming 
- Padma Shri Rattan Lal: A soil scientist who pioneered a soil-centric approach to agriculture 
         
77. In a significant recognition of his contributions to the field of victimology, retired professor K. Chockalingam from Tamil Nadu, India, has been selected for the esteemed Hans von Hentig award.

78. India stands as the 2nd largest Aluminium producer, the 3rd largest lime producer, and the 4th largest iron ore producer in the world

- Union Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan launched the NATS 2.0 portal and disbursed Rs. 100 crore in stipends via DBT to enhance apprenticeship training for young graduates and diploma holders.


       //   August  2024 CA


1 After long time rare case of polio reported in Meghalaya , WHO investigating.
2 india sent 1400 kgs of anti cancer drugs to  Syria as a humanitarian assistance (aid).
3. paetongtarn Shinawatra became PM of Thailand recently.
4  AIM-174B – US Navy Readies ‘Double Ranged’ Air-To-Air Missile That Can Hunt PLAAF Aircraft From 400 KM. // defence
5- 'Virupaksha' is radar for Sukhoi aircraft of IAF                                                    // defence
6- 'Dumbur Dam', is located in Tripura state , made on Gumti river.
7- INS  Arighat - ballistc nuclear submarine , under project 75 alpha                    // defence

8- Dhordo(village in kutchh) became best tourism village by UNWTO(united nation world tourism organisation)

9- As of July 2024, there are 43 UNESCO World Heritage Sites in India(6th highest in the world) with the recent inclusion of “Moidams – the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom Dynasty from Assam.
   42nd - Hoysala dynasty  temples    41- SHantiniketan - Rabindranath tagore
35- cultural
7-natural and 1 mixed(Kanchenzunga national park)

10- Ritu Kharidwal was leading lady behind chandrayan-3 mission.

11- In Asian games 2023 two games were newly added  e-sports and breakdance.
12- The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) unveiled the Unified Lending Interface (ULI) platform to simplify the lending process in India
13 Govt Approves BioE3(Biotechnology for economy , environment and employment) Policy to Propel High-Performance Biomanufacturing in India

14 NITI Aayog has launched a 3-month 'Sampoornata Abhiyan' campaign from 4th-30th September 2024.
- It aims to achieve saturation in 6 identified indicators in Aspirational Districts and 6 indicators in Aspirational Blocks.

15. Manoj Mittal has taken charge as Chairman and Managing Director (CMD) of Small Industries Development Bank of India (Sidbi),
Total 8 Pm has been given Bharat Ratna and 6 President Has been given Bharat Ratna
16.Manyachiwadi village in the Patan Taluka of Satara district was the first village in Maharashtra to be fully powered by solar energy under the Solar Village Scheme. 

17.Teghbir Singh, a five-year-old boy from Ropar, Punjab, became the youngest Asian to summit Mount Kilimanjaro in August 2024.

18. Arjun Vajpai, the youngest person to climb Mt. Everest, has once again made India proud by accomplishing another historic feat. On October 9, 2024, Arjun Vajpai stood atop Mt. Shishapangma, completing his 8th successful summit of a peak over 8,000 meters.

19.India's Ministry of Tourism is actively engaging in the Arabian Travel Mart 2024 in Dubai, aiming to bolster its presence in the Middle East tourism market. At the event, the 'Incredible India' pavilion showcases diverse destinations, including hill resorts promoted through the 'Cool Summers of India' campaign
20. The Silent Valley Movement was a social and environmental campaign in Kerala, India to protect the Silent Valley rainforest from a hydroelectric dam: 

21 Shah Rukh Khan was the first Indian to receive the Pardo alla Carriera award at the Locarno Film Festival in Switzerland

22 Recently, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) reported that Cyclone Asna has formed over the Kutch coast in Gujarat and adjoining areas of Pakistan. name given by Pakistan.


23. Nomadic elephant military exercise between india and Mongolia at umroi, Meghalaya.     // defence

24. KhaanQuest 2024 was a multinational military exercise that took place from July 27 to August 9, 2024 in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia. The exercise focused on building partnerships and alliances for crisis and conflict response.      // defence

25. The Indian Naval Submarine (INS) Shalki recently arrived at the port of Colombo for a two-day formal visit.It is a Shishumar-class diesel-electric submarine. It is also the first-ever submarine that was built in India by MDL.         // defence

26. The 32nd International Conference of Agricultural Economists (ICAE) was held from August 2–7, 2024 in New Delhi, India, inaugurated by PM modi.
Theme: "Transformation Towards Sustainable Agri-Food Systems" 

27. The Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill 2024
- The Bill proposes that NDMA and SDMA directly prepare their respective national and state disaster management plans, bypassing the NEC and SECs.
- Urban Disaster Management Authority: The Bill introduces Urban Disaster Management Authorities (UDMA) for state capitals and large cities, except for the National Capital Territory of Delhi and Union territory of Chandigarh.

- The Bill empowers state governments to create State Disaster Response Forces (SDRFs) with defined functions and terms of service, enhancing local response capabilities.

- Statutory Status to Existing Committees: The Bill grants statutory status to the National Crisis Management Committee (NCMC) and the High-Level Committee (HLC), which will handle major disasters and financial assistance respectively.

- Penalties and Directives: The Bill seeks to insert a new Section 60A to empower the Central and State governments to direct any person to take any action or refrain from taking any action for reducing the impact of a disaster and to impose a penalty not exceeding Rs 10,000.

28. Alzheimer disease: causes progressive decline in memory , thinking, learning and organizing skills , 'Leqembi' is a drug that treats early Alzheimer disease by reducing amount of amyloid beta in the brain. 
 - it is a monoclonal antibody therapy. administered at intravenous infusion every two weeks.

29. Exercise Mitrashakti , army exercise between india and srilanka held at Army training school , Maduruoya, Srilanka.

30 The National Pest Surveillance System (NPSS) was launched by Union Agriculture and Farmers Welfare Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan. The NPSS is an AI-based platform that aims to help farmers manage pests and improve crop productivity: 

31 The Indian Coast Guard's (ICG) first indigenously built pollution control vessel, Samudra Pratap, was launched in Goa on August 29, 2024. The vessel was built by Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL). 

32. Recently, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs has brought to light the ambitious Pradhan Mantri-Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyan (PM-JANMAN) Scheme. Aimed at uplifting Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs).
- PM JANMAN is a government scheme that aims to bring tribal communities into the mainstream.
- PM Janman colony built at Shivpuri.

33. Nankai Trough: Eurasian plate and phillipines plate.
-It runs from Shizuoka, west of Tokyo, to the southern tip of Kyushu Island.

34. Gaurav is glide bomb developed by DRDO.
35 India's first digital court for Negotiable Instruments Act Cases inaugurated in Kollam , kerala by Supreme Court judge Justice BR Gavai.
 Online Dispute Resolution platform - We Solv.

36. Bharat Biotech unveils oral cholera vaccine developed in partnership with Hilleman Labs, us based

37. INS Tabar, a frontline frigate of the Indian Navy, arrived in Saint Petersburg to participate in the 328th Russian Navy Day celebrations

38. Gati Shakti Vishwavidyalaya (GSV) has started its first executive training program for the aviation sector at the Asian Institute of Transport Development (AITD) at Dwaraka, New Delhi.

39. The National Commission for Women (NCW) has inaugurated the Digital Shakti Center in New Delhi to address the rising cybercrimes against women.
40 “VIRAASAT”, a fortnight long exhibition dedicated to
celebrating 10th National Handloom Day began at
Handloom Haat in Janpath on 3rd August, 2024
41.Punjab Chief Minister Bhagwant Mann inaugurated the ‘Punjab Help Centre’ at Terminal 3 of Indira Gandhi International Airport, New Delhi.

42. China is launching its “Thousand Sails” satellite constellation to rival SpaceX’s Starlink. The first 18 satellites were successfully deployed, with plans for 648 by next year and 15,000 by decade’s end.

43. Purandar Highlands Farmers Producer Company Ltd has achieved a significant milestone by exporting India’s first GI-tagged fig juice to Poland. This follows the successful export of India’s first commercial consignment of GI-tagged Purandar figs to Hong Kong in February 2023.

44. Odisha has introduced India’s first round-the-clock grain dispensing machine, known as the Annapurti Grain ATM, designed to transform the Public Distribution System (PDS)

45 IIT Indore has created advanced shoes incorporating TriboElectric Nanogenerator (TENG) technology, which generates electricity from humanmotion and integrates GPS for real-time location tracking.

46. India has initiated an anti-dumping investigation into the import of hot rolled flat products from Vietnam following complaints that these products are being sold atsignificantly low prices, negatively impacting the domestic steel industry.

47 Punjab, Telangana, Kerala, and West Bengal have yet to implement the Right to Education (RTE) Act, 2009

48. India has reduced the windfall tax on petroleum crude oil to Rs 2,100 per metric tonne, effective August 17, down from Rs 4,600 per tonne.
49. The Maharashtra government has recently declared the geoglyphs and petroglyphs in Ratnagiri as protected monuments under the Maharashtra Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1960.

50. The Neelakurinji (Strobilanthes kunthiana), a remarkable flowering shrub native to the montane grasslands of southwest India, has recently been added to the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species.

51. In a groundbreaking discovery, archaeologists may have uncovered the world’s oldest solar calendar at the renowned archaeological site of Göbekli Tepe in southern Turkey.

52. Sweden has confirmed its first case of the mpox Clade I variant, marking the first occurrence of this more dangerous strain outside Africa.

53 Amazon India and Gentari Green Mobility India have announced a strategic partnership aimed at significantly boosting Amazon’s electric vehicle (EV) fleet for last-mile deliveries.

54. India and New Zealand have signed a Bilateral Customs Cooperation Arrangement to facilitate easier trade between the two nations

56 India’s industrial production, as measured by the Index of Industrial Production (IIP), grew by 4.2% in June 2024, marking the slowest growth in five months.

57 India and Japan will hold 2+2 Ministerial Dialogue in New
Delhi on August 20. On the sidelines of the 2+2 dialogue, a
bilateral meeting is scheduled between the Defence
Minister and his Japanese counterpart
58. The Rajiv Gandhi International Airport (RGIA) in Hyderabad
has once again been recognized as the Best Airport at the
prestigious India Travel Awards,
59. The Export Promotion Council for Handicrafts (EPCH)
organised its 24th Handicrafts Export Awards Function on
August 21, at the Convention Hall
60
********************* September 2024  Current Affairs *********************

1. The Union Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways has named Olympic medalist shooter Manu Bhaker as its Brand Ambassador.

2. Lapata Ladies - Oscar 2025 - by Kiran Rao

3. Exercise eastern bridge 7 , Iaf and air force of Oman , held at Masirah, Oman                      // defence
4. Space Force of Usa and india will make national semiconductor security plant in india.
5. Port Blair renamed as 'Sri Vijaya Puram'
6. India ranked 3rd in Asia power index. , India has moved up to the 39th position among 133 economies in the Global Innovation Index (GII) 2024 , published by word intellectual property , Switzerland 1st
7. claudia Sheinbaum recently became first women president of Mexico.
8. India foreign minister visit SCO meet 2024 in Pakistan.
9. 11 classical languages in india , 6 languages - Tamil telugu Sanskrit Malayalam kannada odia , 5 new languages added in 2024 - marathi  Bengali pali prakrit and assamese.
10 BharatGen , a pioneering initiative in generative AI.
11 African Country Rwanda declared outbreak of Marburg virus
12 Super typhoon Krathon hit phillipines and Taiwan
13 
14  Recently, France hosts world's largest naval defence exhibition 'EURONAVAL 2024.         //defence
15  The Maharashtra government has granted 'Rajyamata-Gomata' status to indigenous breeds of cows in the state.
16  Mount Erebus, Antarctica's tallest and southernmost active volcano, emits microscopic gold particles into the atmosphere: 
17  India joined US led Mineral security Network
18 Finance Minister is the ex-officio Governor on the Board of Governors of the IMF. RBI Governor is the Alternate Governor at the IMF.
19 The United States has recently announced a significant military aid package for Taiwan. This package, valued at $567 million, is aimed at bolstering Taiwan’s defense capabilities amid increasing political and military pressure from China.
20  Vishakapatnamis among the top seafood exporting port of India in terms of dollar value.
21  Shankh Air gets Civil Aviation Ministry nod to take off , Shankh Aviation is led by entrepreneur and chairman Shravan Kumar Vishwakarma
22 Aruna Kumara Dissanayake new president of Srilanka
23 China fired ICBM in pacific Ocean.
24 Iran unveils all new and powerful suicide drone ‘Shahed-136B’
25 Exchange control Manual by RBI
26 Prime Minister Narendra Modi recently inaugurated three PARAM Rudra Supercomputers worth ₹130 crore under the National Supercomputing Mission (NSM).
   These indigenously developed supercomputers, deployed in Pune, Delhi, and Kolkata, will drive advanced research in physics, cosmology, earth sciences, and other scientific fields. The Giant Metre Radio Telescope (GMRT) in Pune, Inter-University Accelerator Centre (IUAC) in Delhi, and S.N. Bose Centre in Kolkata will utilize these systems for cutting-edge research, enhancing India’s scientific capabilities.
- Arka and arunika , high performance computers.

27. Basmati Rice is the largest in terms of export value.
28 India's first paperless election happened in Madhya Pradesh for sarpanch election by state election commission. village panchayat Ratua Ratanpur.

29 India pledges 47.4 Crore for construction of 12 impactful projects in Nepal.
30 china launched smart dragon-3 rocket launching 8 satelites.
31 India and Uzbekistan signed Bilateral Investment treaty to ensure protection of investors

33 Exercise Silent Shark is a biennial anti-submarine warfare exercise between the US and South Korean navies. 
34 India has signed a new contract to import 73,000 SiG Sauer SiG-716 assault rifles from the US
35 Australia implemented right to disconnect , France was first country to implement right to disconnect.
36 Lupex mission - joint venture of isro(india) and JAXA(Japan) ,
-Primary Goal: To explore the moon’s southern polar region, investigating the presence of water and other elements, potentially in the form of surface ice.
-It will features both a lander and a rover. JAXA is responsible for developing and operating the rover, and ISRO for developing and operating the lander that will carry the rover.

37 India is building 12 new industrial smart cities at an estimated cost of Rs 28,602 crore.
38- India Maldives sign 400 million dollar agreement
39 The India-Oman joint military exercise, AL-NAJAH 5 – 2024(Army exercise),  at the Rabkoot Training Area in Oman.   // defence

40 Indo-Oman bilateral naval exercise Naseem-Al-Bahr was held in Goa from October 2024. INS Trikand and Dornier Maritime Patrol Aircraft participated with the Royal Navy of Oman Vessel Al Seeb.   // defence

41 Mohammad Younus , current interim government of Bangladesh got nobel peace prize in 2006.Mohammad Younus and Grameen Bank for their efforts to create economic and social development from below.

42 India ranks 4th in Renewable energy production in world. 

43 The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is planning to enforce a 5% run-off factor for retail deposits that are accessible through mobile and internet banking. The new rules are expected to come into effect on April 1, 2025. 

44 The Trade Connect e-Platform is a digital initiative that provides exporters with information and resources to help them trade internationally.

45 Mexico becomes first country to approve popular election of judges

46 The Public Tech Platform for Frictionless Credit (PTPFC) was rebranded as the Unified Lending Interface (ULI) to facilitate more streamlined and accessible credit services under the RBI Innovation Hub.

47 Tarang Shakti 2024 was India's first multinational air exercise, held in August and September 2024 in TN // defence

 In two phases: phase 1 in Sulur Tamilnadu and phase 2 in jodhpur Rajasthan. Participating countries: Fifty-one countries were invited to take part in the exercise and nearly 30 of them will be taking part in it. 12 countries actually participated in that.


48 'Kavach' is one of the cheapest, Safety Integrity Level 4 (SIL-4) certified technologies with the probability of error is 1 in 10,000 years

49 On 7 August 2024, Madouri was appointed by President Kais Saied of Tunisia.

50. President Droupadi Murmu was conferred the 'Companion of the Order' of Fiji, the country's highest civilian award on August 6.

51 India is ranked 39th in the 2024 Travel and Tourism Development Index (TTDI) published by the World Economic Forum (WEF), USA is 1st. 

52 Marathi language given classical language honor in Nigeria.

53 Rashtriya Vigyan Purashkar - started in 2024
- The ISRO- Chandrayan 3 Team will be awarded the Vigyan Team award for their contribution in the field of Space Science and Technology.
- Celebrated biochemist 'Govindarajan Padmanabhan' has been selected as the first recipient of the Vigyan Ratna Puraskar. 

54 T corona borealis is a binary star system.

55 Exercise Udara Shakti 2024 was a joint air exercise between the Indian Air Force (IAF) and the Royal Malaysian Air Force (RMAF) that took place from August 5–9, 2024 at the RMAF base in Kuantan, Malaysia    //defence
 

56 The third Voice of Global South Summit (VOGSS) was held on August 17, 2024, in a virtual format. The summit's theme was "An Empowered Global South for a Sustainable Future". The summit was an opportunity for countries in the Global South to discuss challenges, priorities, and solutions, especially in the developmental domain. 

57. The West Bengal government has announced plans to establish five new POCSO fast-track special courts in the state. Currently, West Bengal has 62 POCSO courts, along with six e-POCSO courts

58 . Yudhbhyas 2024 , army exercise, india and usa at Mahajan field firing ranges ,Rajasthan.

59. The 2024 SASTRA Ramanujan Prize was awarded to Dr. Alexander Dunn, an assistant professor in the School of Mathematics at the Georgia Institute of Technology. Cash prize 10000 dollar , candidate must be 32 year or younger.

60. The 2024 Ramon Magsaysay Award(often called Asia's Nobel prize , instituted  in 1957) was given to four individuals and an organization, including Japanese filmmaker Hayao Miyazaki: beloved Japanese animator Hayao Miyazaki co-founder of Studio Ghibli,Karma Phuntsho honoured for bridging Bhutan's rich heritage with modern challenges , 
- Rural Doctors Movement (Thailand) is being recognized for improving public health and empowering rural citizens, ensuring no one is left behind in the country’s progress.
- Nguyen Thi Ngoc Phuong (Vietnam) is being honoured for her research on Agent Orange's/Dioxin’s impact and her dedication to supporting its victims, highlighting the long-term consequences of war.

- Farwiza Farhan (Indonesia) is being recognized for her emergent leadership in protecting endangered natural resources, promoting social justice, and advocating for responsible stewardship of nature.

61. Union Minister for Road, Transport and Highways Shri. Nitin Gadkari Ji, set to inaugurate Oxygen Bird Park (Amrit Mahotsav Park) on the Nagpur-Hyderabad National highway 44 in Nagpur, in state of Maharashtra. 
- It is initiated by National Highway Authority of India (NHAI). And this park came up at Jamtha Clover Leaf along Nagpur-Hyderabad Highway.

62. The West Bengal Assembly has passed the Aparajita Women and Child (West Bengal Criminal Laws Amendment) Bill, 2024 which aims to address issues of violence against women.

- It includes provisions for capital punishment and the harshest penalties for rape and sexual harassment.


-Project Naman - Indian army , Provide comprehensive support to Veterans and their families.

-- UDAN (Ude Desh ke Aam Nagrik) scheme.
** GST council meeting highlights.

- The GST rate on cancer drugs namely, Trastuzumab Deruxtecan, Osimertinib and Durvalumab to be reduced from 12% to 5%.
- Gst rate on namkeen bhujiya reduced from 18 to 12%.

- Approved flying training courses conducted by DGCA approved Flying Training Organizations (FTOs) are exempt from the levy of GST.

63.  First foreign university to open campus in india is University of Southampton in Gurugram.
- the fees at the Indian campus are likely to be around 60 per cent of the tuition fees at the Southampton campus but the admission requirements will be the same.

64. Under the aegis of National One Health Mission (NOHM), "Vishanu Yuddh Abhyas" (Virus War Exercise), was conducted in Ajmer district of Rajasthan state, from August 27 to August 31, 2024 to assess pandemic preparedness. This exercise aimed to evaluate the readiness and response of the National Joint Outbreak Response Team (NJORT) composed of experts from human health, animal husbandry and wildlife sectors. A mock zoonotic disease outbreak scenario was created to simulate a real-world outbreak.

65. The Honorable Vice President of India Shri. Jagdeep Dhankhar has inaugurated the “Constitutional Temple – Samvidhan Mandir” at 433 Industrial Training Institutes across Maharashtra.

66. Typhoon Yagi recently struck Southeast Asia, the government of India has launched Operation Sadbhavana, a humanitarian initiative aimed at providing crucial assistance to affected countries.

67. Cambodia’s Angkor Wat has been recognized as the most photogenic UNESCO World Heritage site in Asia by Times Travel, as announced by Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Manet on September 15.

68.The Union Cabinet has approved the Biotechnology
Research Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development
(Bio-RIDE) scheme to boost biotechnology research,
innovation, and entrepreneurship with an outlay of ₹9,197
crore for the 15th Finance Commission period (2021-22 to
2025-26).

69. Kerala has once again secured first position in the State
Food Safety Index (SFSI) 2024, marking the second
consecutive year that the southern state has claimed the
spot.

70. Prime Minister Narendra Modi laid the foundation stone
for the PM Mega Integrated Textile Regions and Apparel
Park (PM MITRA) in Maharashtra’s Amravati.

71. Iran launched its Chamran-1 research satellite into orbit.

72. Typhoon bebinca - china , Japan , phillipines

73. The World Health Organization (WHO) has officially recognized Jordan as the first country globally to eliminate leprosy

74. 'VisioNxt', launched by the National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT), is a fashion forecasting initiative aimed at fostering global competition and elevating Indian culture and design.

75 India has secured Tier 1 status in the Global Cybersecurity Index (GCI) 2024, published by then International Telecommunication Union (ITU).

76 The NPS Vatsalya Scheme, announced in the Union Budget 2024-25, will be launched by Finance Minister Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman on September 18, 2024, in New Delhi. This initiative allows parents to invest in pension accounts for their children with flexible contributions starting at Rs. 1,000 annually.

77 Odisha launched the scheme of “Subhadra”, flagship initiative for benefit of women.

78. The Union Cabinet has approved the Chandrayaan-4 mission, which aims to develop technologies for returning to Earth after landing on the moon and collecting lunar samples for analysis. The total cost of the mission is Rs 2104.06 crore. complete withing 36 months or 3 years.

79 In an effort to encourage voter participation in the upcoming Jammu and Kashmir Assembly Elections, the Office of the Chief Electoral Officer (CEO), J&K, launched the theme song ‘Vote Ka Tyohar’.

80 Divya kala Mela at vishakapatnam.

81. Gopichand Thotakura, India’s first civilian space tourist.

82. India’s space efforts received a significant boost with the successful launch of RHUMI-1, the world’s first mobile hybrid rocket. This achievement also marks a milestone as the first reusable hybrid rocket in India. Developed by Chennai-based startup Space Zone India in collaboration with Martin Group, RHUMI-1 represents a leap forward in rocket technology, promising to enhance efficiency and reduce operational costs in space exploration.

83. The Ministry of Home Affairs has decided to create five new districts in the union territory of Ladakh, said home minister Amit Shah on August 26.
 - These districts are – Zanskar, Drass, Sham, Nubra and Changthang.

84. 

// October 2024  Current Affairs

1. food price inflation(CFPI) in September 2024 is 9.24 % from 5.66% in august , headline inflation 5.49% and core inflation 3.49%.Krishonnati Yojana (KY) – Focuses on food security and agricultural self-sufficiency.

2. Pradhan Mantri Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (PM-RKVY) – A cafeteria scheme aimed at promoting sustainable agriculture. To promote sustainable agriculture and improve agricultural productivity.

   Krishonnati Yojana (KY) – Focuses on food security and agricultural self-sufficiency.

3. USA gave THAAD missile defense system to Israel.

4. S jaishankar went to Pakistan for SCO meeting. The 24th SCO Summit in Astana adopted the Astana Declaration and approved 25 strategic agreements on energy, security, trade, finance, and information security. 25th sco summit in china.

5. European space agency Proba 3 will be launched by ISRO.

6. Supreme court by 4:1 majority upholds constitutional validity of section 6A of citizenship amendment act, which granted citizenship to immigrants who      entered assam before march 24,1971.

7. Delhi gov. planning to implement congestion tax to reduce traffic during peak hours.

8. According to WEF , Hongkong is world's freest economy

9. The Bushveld Igneous Complex (BIC) is a geological intrusion in South Africa that contains some of the world's richest ore deposits.

10 In 50000 villages in 310 districts  government planning for climate resilient farming.

11 Li-Fi technology developed by velmennis to address communication challenges of Indian Navy. iDex initiative 2018.

12 The 2024 16th BRICS summit , held in Kazan, Russia(on Bank of Volga river). It was the first BRICS summit to include Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran, and the United Arab Emirates as members, following their accession to the organization at the 15th BRICS summit.
     The theme of the event was: “Strengthening Multilateralism for Fair Global Development and Security.” 
- 2025 brics summit will be held at Brazil.

13 Germany is largest trading partner of India in Europe.

14 India and Pakistan agreed to renew their agreement to operate the Kartarpur Corridor to facilitate pilgrims from India to visit the Kartarpur Sahib Gurudwara for another five years till 2029.

15 Egypt has been certified as a malaria-free country by the World Health Organization (WHO) after 100 years of efforts to eradicate the disease.

16 rank of India in the Economic Freedom Report, 2024 is 84th(By Heritage foundation and wall street journal).

17 Reliance industries signed agreement with NVIDIA to setup AI infrastructure in india.

18 The Veerangana Durgavati Tiger Reserve is located in the state of Madhya Pradesh. It is the seventh tiger reserve in the state and the 54th in India.

19 'Salt Typhoons' hacked trump Phones , they are chinese hackers.

20 India ranks 79th in World justice report's Rule of  Law Index 2024. 

21 India imports around 95% of its lithium, cobalt and graphite from Australia ,chile and china.

22 c295 is military aircraft ,manufactured in Vadodara ,tie up between tata advance systems and airbus.

23 An Indian Army contingent comprising 25 personnel departed for Cijantung, Jakarta, Indonesia to take part in the 9th edition of India-Indonesia Joint Special Forces Exercise Garuda Shakti 24.

24 Punjab & Sind Bank (PSB) has launched an e-Bank Guarantee (e-BG) facility in partnership with National e-Governance Services Ltd (NeSL), transitioning from traditional paper-based bank guarantees to a fully digital format using e-stamping and e-signatures.

25 Japan launched a Satellite named 'LignoSat' made of wood , Material= Honoki Wood ,Purpose= Orbit around the earth for   six months & importantly measure the strength of material 

26 5th joint army exercise between india and Vietnam , Vinbax-2024 at Ambala and Chandimandir. Closing ceremony at Kaushalya dam , pinjore  // defence

27 The third edition of the joint military exercise AUSTRAHIND commenced today at the Aund Miliatry station in Pune, Maharashtra. The exercise, scheduled from 8th to 21st November 2024, is a key annual event held alternately in India and Australia.   // defence

28 Indian astrophysicist Prahlad Chandra Agrawal, who has been involved with major Indian space programmes including the AstroSat space telescope and 
   the Chandrayaan 1 lunar mission, has been awarded the COSPAR Harrie Massey Award 2024.

29 Sankalan App, recently seen in the news, is related to 'New Criminal Laws'

30 Recently, the Defence Space Agency under the Ministry of Defence conducted India's first-ever Space Exercise 'Antariksha Abhyas' in New Delhi. 
 -The Kármán line, 100 kilometres above mean sea level, is considered the boundary where Earth ends and outer space begins.      // defence

31 The Olympic Order is the highest award given by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) to recognize exceptional contributions to the Olympic Movement. 
The 2024 recipient of the Olympic Order Award is Tony Estanguet from France. In 2024, 'Abhinav Bindra' became the first Indian to receive the Olympic Order:

32 Pendyala Lakshmi Priya from Hanumakonda was the only girl from Telangana who was selected for the Pradhan Mantri Rashtriya Bal Puraskar-2024 Award for her outstanding performance in Kuchipudi dance under art and culture category. Cash prize 1 lakh.

33 The Jan Poshan Kendra pilot project is a government initiative to transform 60 Fair Price Shops (FPS) or ration shops into nutrition-focused community centers in four states: Gujarat, Rajasthan, Telangana, and Uttar Pradesh: 

34 Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) is a component of Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) Scheme in which individuals with prior learning experience or skills are assessed and certified.

35 The Union Cabinet approved the continuation and merger of various schemes of the Department of Science and Technology (DST) into three major components under a unified central sector scheme named 'Vigyan Dhara' .
-Duration: The scheme has been proposed for the 15th Finance Commission period from 2021-22 to 2025-26.

36 'Kairos' by Jenny Erpenbeck(originally written in German), translated by Michael Hofmann, wins the International Booker Prize 2024.

37 'Orbital' by Samantha Harvey wins the Booker Prize 2024.

38. Jharkhand Chief Minister Hemant Soren on Monday launched 'Upasthiti (attendance) Portal' to ensure daily attendance of doctors, para-medical staff and others

39 Dinesh kartik brand ambassador of South Africa t20 league

40 Alok Shukla: An environmental activist from Chhattisgarh, India, who led a campaign to save 445,000 acres of forests from 21 planned coal mines. The forests, known as the "lungs of Chhattisgarh", are one of the largest intact forest areas in India. 

41. Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) launched two indigenous fast patrol vessels, 'Adamya' and 'Akshar', designed for the Indian Coast Guard, on 28th October.

42. 9th Ayurveda Day on October 29, 2024, this observance aligns with Dhanvantari Jayanti and brings together over 150 countries under the theme, “Ayurveda Innovations for Global Health.” 

43. Hurricane Oscar made landfall in the Bahamas before crossing Cuba’s eastern coast,

44. A team of scientists has discovered a new species of snake in the Western Himalayas, naming it Anguiculus dicaprioi in honor of Hollywood star Leonardo DiCaprio.

45. Odisha is set to host the 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas from January 8th to 10th next year in its capital city, Bhubaneswar.

46. Union Minister Shri JP Nadda launched the “Scheme for Strengthening the Medical Device Industry” with a budget of Rs. 500 crore, focusing on making India self-sufficient in medical devices.

47. Union Labour Minister Mansukh Mandaviya launched the upgraded ‘e-Shram: One Stop Solution’ portal, aimed at enhancing access to social security schemes for over 300 million unorganised workers in India.

48. Assam Chief Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma officially launched Mission Basundhara 3.0 at an event held at
Srimanta Sankardev Kalakshetra in Guwahati. This ambitious initiative is designed to empower indigenous communities by providing them with formal land rights

49. In a strategic move to bolster artificial intelligence (AI) in India, Meta has partnered with IndiaAI and the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) to drive open-source AI research and skill development.

50. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) has been recognized with the prestigious SHRM HR Excellence Awards at the SHRM India Annual Conference 2024 in New Delhi.

51. The Ministry of Information & Broadcasting is proud to announce Australia as the “Country of Focus” for the 55th edition of the International Film Festival of India (IFFI).

52. Chief Minister Shri Bhupendra Patel inaugurated the 17th Urban Mobility India Conference & Expo-2024 today at the Mahatma Mandir Convention Centre in Gandhinagar, Gujarat

53. The two-week United Nations Biodiversity Conference (COP16) held in Colombia aimed at halting and reversing the loss of biodiversity.
 - CBD is an international agreement for conserving biodiversity with the vision of “living in harmony with nature by 2050”.
 - adopted at rio earth summit 1992. first took place in Bahamas 1994.

54. In October 2024, India extended a line of credit (LOC) of Rs 487.60 crore to Mauritius to mybiz
fund a water pipeline replacement project: 

• DRDO successfully test-fired an Indigenous Technology Cruise Missile (ITCM) from Chandipur, Odisha.

The first-ever tri-service planning conference is called "Parivartan Chintan." 

Exercise "Eastern Wave" was conducted by the Indian Navy off the eastern seaboard. 

Indian Army received portable Igla-Surface-to-Air Defence System from russia.Very Short Range Air Defence (VSHORAD) capabilities.
 Sadbhavna by Indian Army Plastic Waste Management and Recycling Plant inaugurated in Changgu, East Sikkim. 

55. Recently, the Prime Minister inaugurated and laid the foundation stone for projects worth over Rs 80,000 crore in Jharkhand, including the launch of Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (DAJGUA). Dharti Aaba refers to Birsa Munda, a 19th-century tribal leader and anti-colonial icon from Jharkhand. 
- He also inaugurated 40 Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRS) and laid the foundation stone for 25 more, along with several projects under the Pradhan Mantri Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyan (PM-JANMAN).

56. The 8th Bharatiya Kala Mahotsav focused on north eastern states was an eight-day cultural festival held at the Rashtrapati Nilayam in Hyderabad from September 29 to October 6, 2024: 

57. Recently, the Food Corporation of India (FCI) has launched a digital transformation initiative to modernize its supply chain management system, known as 'Depot Online System', with the implementation of a new, microservices-based integrated supply chain management system named Anna Darpan. 

58. Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi inaugurated three new airports  under  UDAAN scheme from Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh today. The newly inaugurated airports are located in Rewa (MP), Ambikapur (Chhattisgarh), and Saharanpur (UP).

59.Karmyogi Saptah - aims to foster continuous skill enhancement among civil servants, aligning their competencies with the evolving goals of India

60. The Union Minister of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry, and Dairying, Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh, also known as Lalan Singh, is set to launch the 21st Livestock Census operation, a significant initiative aimed at gathering comprehensive data on India’s livestock sector at a cost of ₹200 crore.

61. Haryana has become the first state to implement sub quotas for the Dalit community by subclassifying the
Scheduled Castes (SCs). 

62. The National Centre for Good Governance (NCGG) has
successfully concluded its 34th Capacity Building
Programme (CBP) for Maldivian civil servants in New Delhi.

63. pink alarms by MP for women safety at the government-run district hospital and medical college in Datia.

64.*** A significant archaeological discovery has been made at the Sri Singeeswarar temple in Mappedu village, Tiruvallur district, where a set of copper plate inscriptions dating back to the 16th Century CE were found.  officials uncovered two leaves of copper plates strung together with a ring featuring the seal of the Vijayanagara Kingdom. The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) confirmed that the inscriptions, engraved in 1513 during the reign of King Krishnadevaraya, are written in Sanskrit using the Nandinagari script.

65 Delhi government, led by Chief Minister Atishi, has approved the establishment of special courts dedicated to people with disabilities.

66 A Grand Cultural Event The International Gita Mahotsav will be celebrated from November 28 to December 15, 2024, in Kurukshetra, Haryana

67 The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has sanctioned a USD 434.25 million loan to support Assam’s renewable energy ambitions by constructing a 500 MW grid-connected solar photovoltaic (PV) facility in the Karbi Anglong district.

68 Union Labour Minister Mansukh Mandaviya launched the upgraded ‘e-Shram: One Stop Solution’ portal, aimed at enhancing access to social security schemes for over 300 million unorganised workers in India.

69 Basundhara 3.0 - Assam - to empower indigenous communities by providing them formal land rights.

70 Maldives President Mohamed Muizzu has announced the introduction of India’s Unified Payments Interface (UPI) to enhance the country’s economy by improving financial inclusion and transaction efficiency.

71 Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar inaugurated and laid the foundation stones for a range of development projects totaling Rs 7,160 crore. Among these initiatives are 2,615 panchayat government buildings spread across various blocks in the state and a new panchayat resource center in Sonepur, Saran district.

72. The European Investment Bank (EIB Global) has announced a significant loan of €300 million (approximately ₹2,800 crore) for the construction of a new suburban railway network in Bengaluru. 

73. NTPC has teamed up with the Indian Army to establish a solar hydrogen-based microgrid at Chushul, Ladakh,

74. IIM shilong partnership with SIDBI for entrepreneurship in north east india.

75 The Election Commission of India signed an agreement for electoral cooperation with Uzbekistan’s central poll body.

76. According to a report released by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the world’s total public debt is poised to surpass $100 trillion this year for the first time

77. The International Copper Association (ICA) is a prominent global industry body that brings together major copperproducers worldwide.
- Representing 50% of the world’s copper production, ICA is a not-for-profit trade association comprising 33 member organizations spanning six continents. 
- Deloitte India’s latest Economic Outlook projects that
India’s economy will grow between 7.0% and 7.2% in the
fiscal year 2024-25, despite a recent slowdown where GDP
expanded by only 6.7% year-on-year in Q1 of FY25

78. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has expanded its ‘Alert List’ of unauthorized forex trading platforms by adding 13 new entities, bringing the total to 88. This list includes names of entities not authorized to deal in forex under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (FEMA).

79. The National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) has revised its growth forecast for India to 6.9-7.1% for FY25

80. Freo, the digital finance application, has received a corporate agent license from the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI), allowing it to offer a range of customized insurance products to its 25 million users

81. Smt. Vijaya Kishore Rahatkar has been appointed as the new Chairperson of the National Commission for Women (NCW).

82 Israel has become the newest non-regional member of the Asian Development Bank (ADB)

83 Justice Sanjiv Khanna has been appointed as the 51st Chief Justice of India (CJI), with his oath-taking ceremony set for November 11, 2024.
 - His appointment follows CJI DY Chandrachud’s recommendation and was confirmed by President Droupadi Murmu. 
 - Justice Khanna will serve as CJI until his retirement on May 13, 2025, holding a tenure of approximately 183 days.

84. The Government of India has appointed Dr. Neena Malhotra as the next Ambassador of India to the Kingdom of Sweden

85. The Indian Navy and German Navy recently completed their inaugural Maritime Partnership Exercise (MPX) in the Indian Ocean, marking a key milestone in naval collaboration. The exercise, held in the Bay of Bengal, included joint operations involving INS Delhi.

86. The theme of this year’s Chanakya defence dialogue, “Drivers in Nation Building: Fueling Growth Through Comprehensive Security".

87. The Army’s Sudarshan Chakra Corps of the Southern Command is currently conducting ‘Exercise SWAVLAMBAN SHAKTI’ at the Babina Field Firing Ranges near Jhansi

88. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) has been recognized with the prestigious SHRM HR Excellence Awards at the SHRM India Annual Conference 2024 in New Delhi.

89. On October 25, 2024, the Indian Navy’s seventh Anti-Submarine Warfare Shallow Water Craft (ASW SWC), named ‘Abhay’, was launched at M/s L&T’s Kattupalli
facility. Built by Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers.

90 The Ministry of Information & Broadcasting is proud to announce Australia as the “Country of Focus” for the 55th edition of the International Film Festival of India (IFFI)

91. Indian actor and philanthropist 'Darasing Khurana', 32, has been honored with the prestigious Mahatma Gandhi Leadership Award for his impactful work in raising awareness about mental health issues, particularly in his role as the ‘Commonwealth Year of Youth Champion.

92. The Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought is the highest human rights honor awarded by the European Union.

93. The Asia Clean Energy Summit (ACES), a cornerstone event of the annual Singapore International Energy Week (SIEW), is held on the 11th edition from October 22-24, 2024, in Singapore.

94. Chief Minister Shri Bhupendra Patel inaugurated the 17th Urban Mobility India Conference & Expo-2024 today at the Mahatma Mandir Convention Centre in Gandhinagar, Gujarat. 

95. Meta has partnered with IndiaAI and the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) to drive open-source AI research and skill development. This collaboration includes establishing a Center for Generative AI at IIT Jodhpur and launching the “AI for Skilling and Capacity Building” initiative

96 The Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS), led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, has approved the establishment of a new missile testing range in Nagayalanka, Andhra Pradesh.         //defence

97. India’s fourth nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine (SSBN), designated S4*, was officially launched into the water at the Ship Building Centre in Visakhapatnam.   // defence

98. Indian Navy’s frontline stealth frigate, INS Talwar, arrived at Simon’s Town, South Africa, on 06 Oct 24 to participate in the eighth edition of IBSAMAR, a joint multinational maritime exercise among Indian, Brazilian, and South African Navy scheduled from 06 to 18 October 2024.   //defence










************2024 Nobel Prize ***********

1. physics
- John hopfield and Geoffrey Hinton for “for foundational discoveries and inventions that enable machine learning with artificial neural networks”

2. chemistry
- David Baker for “for computational protein design” , Demis Hassabis and John Jumper  “for protein structure prediction”


3. physiology or medicine
-Victor Ambros and Gary Ruvkun - “for the discovery of microRNA and its role in post-transcriptional gene regulation”


literature
- Han Kang  - “for her intense poetic prose that confronts historical traumas and exposes the fragility of human life” - book - 'The vegetarian'. south korean


5. peace prize
-Nihon Hidankyo - “for its efforts to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons and for demonstrating through witness testimony that nuclear weapons must never be used again” , from japan


6. Economics

- Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson and James Robinson  - “for studies of how institutions are formed and affect prosperity”

                   
                      ************ November 2024 CA *****************

1. The Indian Army successfully conducted the "Sanyukt Vimochan 2024," a Multilateral Annual Joint Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) exercise, in Ahmedabad and Porbandar, Gujarat, on November 18-19, 2024.            // defence

2. Ballon d’Or is an annual award given by France Football to the best male and female footballers over the previous year. 'Rodri' won best men football award and 'Aitana Bonmatí' earned the title of the world’s best female footballer.
- Real Madrid took home the Men’s Club of the Year award.

3. The Major Atmospheric Cherenkov Experiment (MACE) telescope is a high-altitude imaging telescope in Ladakh, India that studies gamma rays to learn about the universe's most energetic phenomena. built bt BARC and ECIL.
 - The GROWTH-India telescope is India's first fully robotic optical research telescope.Located at the Indian Astronomical Observatory in Hanle, Ladakh, at an altitude of 4,500 meters above sea level. A joint venture between the Indian Institute of Astrophysics (IIA) and the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay (IITB) 




4. 'Cheriyal Folk Art' of Telangana, the Abujhmadia tribal art in Chhattisgarh, and Sarangi performances preserving Dogra culture.Jharkhand’s Sohrai painting and Maharashtra’s Mother of Pearl Sea Shell Vase and Warli Painting.

5. The Railway Protection Force (RPF) launched the ‘Digital Memorial of Valour’ in New Delhi.

6. Delimitation means to fix limits or boundaries of territorial constituencies of India to represent any changes in the population.
- Delimitation Commission has been set up four times in years 1952, 1963, 1973 and 2002 under the Acts of 1952, 1962, 1972 and 2002, respectively.

7. Union Home Minister Amit Shah launched the Civil Registration System (CRS) mobile application,

8. India’s first ‘Writer’s Village’ was inaugurated in Dehradun by former President Ram Nath Kovind, along with Uttarakhand Governor Lt Gen Gurmeet Singh and Chief Minister Pushkar Singh Dhami.

9. Aandhi, a small village located about 43 km from Jaipur in Rajasthan, is making strides towards becoming a zero waste model through the implementation of green technology interventions.

10. Brazil has chosen not to join China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), becoming the second member of the BRICS bloc, after India.

11 The Indian Army contingent, consisting of 25 skilled personnel from The Parachute Regiment (Special Forces), recently embarked on a journey to Cijantung, Jakarta, Indonesia to participate in the 9th edition of the India Indonesia Joint Special Forces Exercise, GARUD SHAKTI 24. Scheduled to take place from November 1 to November 12, 2024.

12 Indian Army contingent embarked on a journey to participate in the 15th edition of the India-US joint Special Forces Exercise, VAJRA PRAHAR, set to be conducted from November 2 to November 22, 2024. This prestigious exercise will take place at the Orchard Combat Training Centre in Idaho, USA.

13 Assam-based conservation scientist 'Bibhab Kumar Talukdar' has been awarded the prestigious 'Harry Messel Award' for Conservation Leadership by the Species Survival Commission (SSC) of the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) in Abu Dhabi.

14 The World Justice Project (WJP) Rule of Law Index 2024 reveals that India ranks 79th out of 142 countries.

15 Harimau Shakti , joint army exercise between india and Malaysia will be held at Bentong camp , Kuala lumpur from 2 dec - 15 December.   // defence

  - CINBAX - army ,india and Cambodia held at Foreign training node , pune in December 2024.

  - Agni warrior - India and Singapore , army , held at Devalali field firing ranges Maharastra.

  - Project Eklavya - by Indian army , a customized learning platform under umbrella of Karamyogi Bharat portal.

  - 'Asmi' machine pistols developed by Colonel prasad bansod of army and DRDO , manufactured by Lokesh Machine Hyderabad.  // defence

 - Project Shakti - army , automates all functions of artillery at tactical and operational levels.

 - Exercise Swavlamban - Fire and maneuver training exercise , held at babina field firing ranges , Jhanshi

- Exercise Kazind - army , india and kazakastan , conducted at Surya Foreign training Node, Auli, Uttarakhand.      // defence

- Project Himank - BRO ,Leh-manali oad , Leh - Hanle road

- Project Udbhav - a novel and unique project to establish Indic heritage of statecraft and strategic thinking.

- Terrier Cyber Quest - National Cyber challenge by the territorial army.

16. To encourage private investment and boost economic growth, the Rajasthan government has launched the Rajasthan Investment Promotion Scheme (RIPS) 2024.

17. Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (ABPMJAY), Prime Minister Narendra Modi launched the Ayushman Vaya Vandana Card on October 29, 2024,
providing free healthcare coverage to all senior citizens aged 70 and above, irrespective of income

18.  November 8, Bengaluru marked a milestone with the inauguration of its first digital population clock at the Institute for Social and Economic Change (ISEC).

19. Telangana haslaunched a statewide caste census

20. Sultanganj railway station in Bihar’s Bhagalpur district is set to be renamed in honor of the revered Hindu shrine, Ajgaibinath Dham

21. Switzerland is set to enforce its controversial “burqa ban” starting January 1, 2025

22. Prof. Sreeram Chaulia’s latest book, Friends – India’s Closest Strategic Partners

23. Australia is set to implement a significant move by banning social media access for children under 16, starting in November 2024.

24 Cairn Oil & Gas, part of Vedanta Group, has become the first oil and gas producer in India to join the UN Environment Programme’s Oil & Gas Methane Partnership (OGMP) 2.0.

25. Royal Enfield has recently unveiled its highly anticipated electric vehicle (EV) brand, “Flying Flea”, an homage to one of the brand’s most iconic models.
26. India and France have been re-elected as the president and co-president of the International Solar Alliance (ISA), respectively, at the seventh ISA assembly held in New Delhi.

27. ISRO announced the launch of its analogue space mission in Leh, Ladakh. This innovative mission aims to simulate life in an interplanetary habitat, addressing the challenges associated with establishing a base station beyond Earth.

28. ISRO is set to launch the European Union’s Proba-3 Solar Observation Mission in December from Sriharikota. The mission aims to study the Sun’s faint corona and is India's third space collaboration with the EU, following Proba-1 and Proba-2.

29. World Science Day for Peace and Development, celebrated on November 10 - “Youth at the Forefront,” .

30. South Africa has launched the Trusted Tour Operator Scheme (TTOS) to attract more visitors from India and China.

31. On November 1, Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu launched the Deepam 2.0 scheme in Edupuram, Srikakulam district, aimed at empowering women by providing free gas cylinders.

32. India is hosting the first-ever Asian Buddhist Summit (ABS) in New Delhi from November 5 to 6, 2024, under the theme, “Role of Buddha Dhamma in Strengthening Asia.” 

33.Anil Pradhan has been awarded the prestigious Rohini Nayyar Prize for 2024, recognizing his impactful contributions to rural development in India.

34. India has launched a significant tri-services military exercise, ‘Poorvi Prahaar,’ beginning November 8, aimed at strengthening military readiness across the eastern front.        //defence

35. The 2nd edition of the Indian Military Heritage Festival (IMHF) is set to begin on November 8, 2024, in New Delhi.       // defence

36. The Indian Navy successfully conducted the third edition of the Mahasagar summit, continuing its flagship outreach initiative for maritime security in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 

37. Madhya Pradesh cabinet, chaired by Chief Minister Mohan Yadav, approved a 35 percent reservation for women in all state government recruitments.

38. The official launch of the Global Alliance against Hunger and Poverty is created in G20 Leaders Summit in November 2024.

39. The US has blocked a Gaza ceasefire draft resolution at the United Nations Security Council - the fourth time it has used its veto power

40. It is caused by the Legionella bacteria, which can only be found in natural bodies of water such as lakes and hot springs. Its outbreak in Victoria,Australia. It is not contagious, meaning it is not spread from person-to-person.Transmission: The most common form of transmission of Legionella is inhalation of contaminated aerosols from contaminated water. 

41. National Disaster due to food poisoning 23 children killed  in South Africa.

42 Prasanthi Ram, an Indian-origin lecturer at Nanyang Technological University, won the Singapore Literature Prize for English fiction for her short story collection Nine Yard Sarees. The award ceremony was held at Victoria Theatre. 

43. The Ajgaibinath temple is an ancient Hindu shrine dedicated to Lord Shiva, located in Sultanganj, Bihar , renamed Ajgaibinath.

44. Cyclone Fengal hit  India and Srilanka , name given by Saudi Arabia

45. India has launched a significant tri-services military exercise, ‘Poorvi Prahaar,’ beginning November 8, aimed at strengthening military readiness across the eastern front.


                               *************************** December Current Affairs **********************

1. Indian army successfully installed optical fiber at Siachen.

2. India's Q2 GDP growth rate for financial year 2024-25 came out to be 5.4%.

3. The recent launch of the Chennai-Vladivostok Eastern Maritime route has cut shipping time and costs, thereby boosting trade between India and Russia in oil, food, and machinery.

4. Recently, the National Institute of Siddha (NIS) has set a Guinness World Record for providing Varmam therapy to 567 individuals simultaneously.
  - It is a traditional system of healing that originated in South India and is considered to be one of India’s oldest systems of medicine. 

5. The Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and Systems (CCTNS) is a centralized online platform conceptualized under the Ministry of Home Affairs.

6. Recently, Madhya Pradesh aims to create a suitable habitat for cheetahs in the Gandhi Sagar Wildlife Sanctuary, spread over 2,500 sq. km of landscape spanning Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan.
  - The Chambal River flows through the sanctuary, dividing it into two parts.
  - It is a designated Important Bird and Biodiversity Area (IBA).

7. The Supreme Court of India has directed the Union government to formulate a comprehensive policy for managing sacred groves across the country.
- Sacred Groves are small patches of forests or natural vegetation that are protected by local communities due to their religious and cultural significance. These areas are often dedicated to local deities and serve as both ecological sanctuaries and sites of spiritual reverence.

8. the union Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Science and Technology unveiled Kisan Kavach.It is a first-of-its-kind anti-pesticide bodysuit designed to protect farmers from the harmful effects of pesticide exposure.
-It is developed by the Biotechnology Research and Innovation Council (BRIC-inStem), Bangalore, in collaboration with Sepio Health Pvt. Ltd.


9. Moldova has officially signed the International Solar Alliance (ISA) Framework Agreement, furthering its commitment to promoting renewable energy.Currently, the ISA has 104 member countries and 16 signatory countries.

10. Cyclone Chido recently struck Mayotte, a French Indian Ocean territory located in the Mozambique Channel.
 - Geographical location: Mayotte is part of the Comoros archipelago, situated in the Mozambique Channel of the Indian Ocean. It consists of two main islands: Grande Terre (main island) and Petite Terre (Pamandzi, smaller island). Mauritius named it.

11. UK became first European country to join CPTPP trade bloc.

12. The Arctic Council is an intergovernmental forum focused on addressing and discussing matters related to the Arctic region. Its key areas of work include scientific research, promoting peaceful cooperation, and ensuring the sustainable use of resources in the Arctic. The Council was established in 1996 through the Ottawa Declaration by the eight Arctic States.
 - The Arctic Tundra has transitioned from a carbon sink to a carbon emitter as confirmed by a new analysis in the ‘Arctic Report Card’ by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

13. Jodhaiya Bai, a celebrated Baiga tribal artist and Padma Shri awardee, passed away at the age of 86 after a prolonged illness. Her passing was reported from her native Lodha village in Umaria district, Madhya Pradesh.

14. INS Nirdeshak is set to be commissioned on December 18 at the Naval Dockyard, Visakhapatnam, built by GRSE Kolkata.
 - It is designed to conduct hydrographic surveys, assist in navigation, and support maritime operations.

15. DRI (Directorate of revenue intelligence)was constituted in 1957 as the apex anti-smuggling intelligence and investigation agency.   
 - It works  under the Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs, Ministry of Finance, Government of India. 

16. A team of researchers from the Bengaluru-based Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE) and their collaborators have discovered five new species of the Darwin wasp subfamily Microleptinae (Hymenoptera:Ichneumonidae) from India and Thailand

17. People belonging to the Birhor tribe, a PVTG in Jharkhand, have joined a movement against child marriage in Giridih for the first time, according to an organisation working in the field of protection of children's rights.
- Some of them are also found in Chhattisgarh, Orissa, and West Bengal.
- They speak the Birhor language, which belongs to the Munda group of languages of the Austroasiatic language family.
- Their language has similarities with Santali, Mundari, and Ho languages.

18. Currently, there are 2.8 million PVTGs belonging to 75 tribes across 22,544 villages in 220 districts across 18 states and Union Territories in India.

19. Recently, the Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), under the Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) has developed a newer version of its own Search and Rescue Aid Tool (SARAT).

20. The Nagaland Tourism Department recently issued a formal apology to the Khiamniungan Union Kohima following the omission of the Khiamniungan Tribe’s name in the Heritage Guide Map displayed during the Hornbill Festival 2024.
- The Khiamniungan tribe is one of the major tribes among the Nagas, with habitation both in India and Myanmar.
- Geographically, the land of Khiamniungans is located in the Eastern part of Nagaland and in the North-Western part of Myanmar.
- Tsokum is one of the most important and significant festivals which is celebrated with great pomp and gaity.

21. Recently, experts suggest that Santa Ana’ winds and climate change are fueling wildfires in the Malibu coastal town of Malibu, California. It is named after Southern California's Santa Ana Canyon.

22. The Kerch Strait is in Eastern Europe and is the only water body that connects the Black Sea with the Sea of Azov.

23. Recently, the Union government launched the 'Jalvahak' scheme to incentivise cargo movement via inland waterways.
 - Under the scheme, cargo owners transporting goods over distances exceeding 300 km via waterways will receive up to 35 per cent reimbursement on operating costs. 
 - The scheme will remain valid for three years and is designed to optimise supply chains for major shipping companies, freight forwarders, and trade bodies.


24. Konda Reddis is a Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group inhabiting the banks of the river Godavari in Andhra Pradesh.
 - They have their own institution of social control called ‘Kula Panchayat’.Each village has a traditional headman called ‘Pedda Kapu’.

25. The 1,300-year-old Abathsahayeshwarar Temple has been chosen by UNESCO to receive the Asia-Pacific Awards for Cultural Heritage Conservation award.
 - located in Thukkatchi in Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu. constructed during the reigns of Kings Vikrama Chola and Kulothunga Chola.

26.Recently, the Indian Institute of Technology-Madras (IIT-M) released highly detailed 3D images of a foetal brain named, Dharini.
- It is now the largest publicly accessible digital dataset of the human fetal brain and is freely available to researchers worldwide.

27. Recently, Israel’s military struck several key Syrian military sites, including naval vessels at the Latakia ports. It is the principal port of Syria.
- It is located in the Eastern part of the Mediterranean coast.

28. Exercise Desert Knight was launched over the Arabian Sea to boost military interoperability and enhance defence ties.It is a trilateral air combat exercise between India, France, and the UAE.

29. In a successful conservation initiative, the white-winged wood duck (deo hansh in Assamese), the state bird of Assam, has been spotted in an artificial pond, "Neelmoni Beel," at Nameri Tiger Reserve (NTR).
- It is a large species of duck and one of the most endangered birds in the world. The adults are largely omnivorous. 

- An omnivorous species is an organism that consumes both plant-based and animal-based food as part of its diet. 

30. The Union Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Science & Technology informed the Rajya Sabha about the DAE- Homi Bhabha Chair Scheme. Administered by department of atomic energy.
- It is for Distinguished Scientist/Professors, in order to give recognition and an opportunity to outstanding Scientists and Engineers including those retired /superannuated scientists/engineers who were involved in the development of sensitive and/ or critical technologies to carry out research and development work in the fields of their choice and of interest to the Department of Atomic Energy.
- The tenure under DAE- Homi Bhabha Chair Scheme is for the period of one to five years at the discretion of the Selection Committee.
- Under the scheme each awardee shall be entitled to an honorarium of Rs.200000/- p.m.(In case honorarium plus pension sanctioned is more than pay last drawn, honorarium would be restricted to pay last drawn before retirement).

31. Scientists find alien-like predator in the depths of the ocean, call it 'Darkness' , local word for people in andes region. found in Atacam trend off the coast of chile.

32. The Minister of State for Heavy Industries and Steel provided information about the SAMARTH Udyog Bharat 4.0 initiative in the Rajya Sabha.
 - It is an initiative of the Ministry of Heavy Industry & Public Enterprises, Government of India under its scheme on Enhancement of Competitiveness in Indian Capital Goods Sector.
- SAMARTH Centres have been providing assistance to industries including MSMEs to train the workforce and make them aware about Industry 4.0 technologies in the following ways:

33. Sultanpur National Park located in the Gurgaon district of Haryana, 46 km from Delhi. Ramsar site in 2021.

34.After 48 years, the Kalyan civil court recently dismissed a suit filed by a Muslim trust claiming ownership of an idgah (prayer space) inside the historical Durgadi Fort in Kalyan and ruled in favour of the state government.
- Perched on the banks of the Ulhas River, the fort provides panoramic views of the surrounding landscape and the city of Kalyan.
- Durgadi Fort was built by Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj and marks the initiation of the Maratha Navy.
- Shivaji Maharaj captured Kalyan and Bhiwandi from Adilshah on 24th October 1654.

35. Nearly 1.30 lakh trees and plants are likely to be felled for the construction of the proposed 150-km-long Malwa Canal, a flagship project of Punjab Chief Minister said recently.
- It is a planned irrigation and water management project in Punjab, India.
- Estimated to cost Rs 2,300 crore, the canal will originate from the Harike headworks on the Sutlej in Ferozepur district. 
- Sutlej has many tributaries, with Baspa, Spiti, Nogli Khad, and Soan River being its main ones. Water from the Sutlej River has been allocated to India according to the Indus Waters Treaty of 1960.

36. The National Dam Safety Authority (NDSA) is a regulatory body in India that was established by the Dam Safety Act of 2021 to oversee dam safety in the country. The NDSA implements the policies, guidelines, and standards for dam safety that are developed by the National Committee on Dam Safety (NCDS).
- The National Dam Safety Authority (NDSA) is likely to submit its final report on the Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation Scheme (KLIS) soon, excluding the aspect of conducting geo-technical tests.
- It is a multi-purpose irrigation project on the Godavari River in Kaleshwaram, Bhupalpally, Telangana, India. 
- It is designed to provide water for irrigation and drinking purposes to about 45 lakh acres in 20 of the 31 districts in Telangana, apart from Hyderabad and Secunderabad. 

37. The Supreme Court recently agreed to examine a plea against the Kerala High Court order in favour of the administration of the Guruvayur temple, which decided to discontinue the ancient ritual of "udayasthamana pooja" on Ekadasi, citing crowd management issues.
- Guruvayoor Sree Krishna Swamy Temple, also known as the Dwarka of the South, is a Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Krishna.
- It is located in the small town of Guruvayur, in the Thrissur District of Kerala.

38. A joint committee of officials has informed the National Green Tribunal (NGT) that stone-crushing units are even altering the course of the Chakki River at many places.
- It is one of the tributaries of the Beas River. It flows through Himachal Pradesh and Punjab and merges with the Beas near Pathankot, Punjab.

39. The United States has developed a new anti-missile system called Dark Eagle and is nearing operational readiness after a successful test flight recently.

40. The Supreme Court recently emphasized the need to balance the protection of Sariska Tiger Reserve's wildlife with the religious sentiments of devotees visiting the Pandupol Hanuman temple.
- It is a revered 5000-year-old shrine located within the lush expanse of the Sariska Tiger Reserve in Alwar, Rajasthan. 

41. According to a paper by Google DeepMind researchers, new machine-learning weather prediction model called GenCast can outperform the best traditional forecasting systems in at least some situations.
- It is anew machine-learning weather prediction model.
- It uses a diffusion model approach similar to artificial intelligence (AI) image generators.
- It can predict the weather for 15 days in just 8 minutes. The old way of predicting weather usually takes hours.
42. The union Minister for Electronics and Information Technology has announced that 8.6 lakh candidates have enrolled in the IndiaAI Future Skills platform.
- It aims to enhance India’s AI workforce readiness by mitigating barriers to entry in AI programs and advancing the AI talent pipeline.

43.The Malayan Night Heron, a migratory bird from Southeast Asia, has been officially recorded in Madurai for the first time, near the Alagar Kovil hills.
- It is also known as Malaysian night heron and tiger bittern,

44. Recently, a team of scientists has claimed that Manganese (Mn) contamination of water is causing cancer in the Gangetic plains of Bihar.
- Manganese is the fifth-most abundant metal on earth that exists in the form of oxides, carbonates and silicates.

45. A stakeholders' coordination meeting aimed at reintroducing rhinoceroses to the D. Ering Wildlife Sanctuary (DEWS) in East Siang District(Arunachal pradesh) was convened recently.establishedin year 1976.
- The sanctuary was previously known as Lali Wildlife Sanctuary after the declaration of Lali Reserve Forest as a sanctuary. It was renamed as D`Ering in the year 1986. 

- It is also home to the Siang River, which is one of the major rivers in Arunachal Pradesh. Dibang and Lohit is tributary of Siang river.

46. The Railways (Amendment) Bill, 2024, was passed recently in the Lok Sabha, despite disruptions.
47. Recently, Google has announced a significant advancement in quantum computing as it unveiled its next-generation chip called 'Willow'.

48. Minister of Cooperation informed the Lok Sabha about the Yuva Sahakar Scheme.
- Yuva Sahakar – Cooperative Enterprise Support and Innovation Scheme” aims to encourage newly formed cooperative societies with new and/or innovative ideas.
- The scheme encourages young entrepreneur Cooperative Societies which are in operation for a minimum of 3 months.
- The loan provided under the scheme is a long-term loan (up to 5 years) and as an incentive, NCDC provides 2% interest subvention on its applicable rate of interest on term loan for the project activities.
- It is being implemented by National Cooperative Development Corporation (NCDC) across the country.
- It is linked with Rs.1000 crores of the Cooperative Start-up and Innovation Fund that has been authorised by the NCDC.
- Yuva Sahakar Scheme is a part of Sahakar 22, a Mission for Doubling Farmers' Income by 2022.
- The National Cooperative Development Corporation (NCDC) was established by an Act of Parliament in 1963 as a statutory Corporation. It works under the Ministry of Cooperation.

49. X-ray Polarimeter explorer:

- It is a NASA Small Explorer Mission in collaboration with the Italian Space Agency (ASI).

- IXPE was launched aboard a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket from Kennedy Space Center, Florida, on December 9, 2021. 
- IXPE is NASA’s first mission to study the polarization of X-rays from many different types of celestial objects.
- Objects such as black holes can heat surrounding gases to more than a million degrees. The high-energy X-ray radiation from this gas can be polarized – vibrating in a particular direction.
- The observatory features three identical telescopes, each consisting of a mirror module assembly with a polarization-sensitive imaging x-ray detector at the focus. 

- An AGN(active galactic nucleus) is an extremely bright central region of a galaxy that is dominated by the light emitted by dust and gas as it falls into a black hole. The extremely luminous central region is emitting so much radiation that it can outshine the rest of the galaxy altogether. AGNs emit radiation across the entire electromagnetic spectrum, from radio waves to gamma rays.

50. A complete and annotated version of the works of C. Subramania Bharati will be released by Prime Minister in New Delhi.
 - He was a poet, freedom fighter, and social reformer from Tamil Nadu.
- He was known as Mahakavi Bharathiyar, and the laudatory epithet Mahakavi means a great poet.
- He was born in Ettayapuram, South India, in 1882, and died in Madras in 1921.
- Bharathi was essentially a lyrical poet. Bharati’s best-known works included Kaṇṇan pattu (1917; Songs to Krishna), Panchali sapatham (1912; Panchali’s Vow), and Kuyil pattu (1912; Kuyil’s Song). 

- He also translated Vedic hymns, Patanjali's Yoga Sutra and Bhagavat Gita into Tamil.

51. Scientists from the University of Bristol and the UK Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) have created the world's first carbon-14 diamond battery.

52. Recently, during Ashtalakshmi 2024 event many Geographical Indication tagged products were showcased.
 - Adi Kekir Ginger : It is grown in the Dibang Valley of Arunachal Pradesh and cultivated by the Adi tribe.

- Dalle Khursani  :It is a fiery red pepper grown in Sikkim that has earned fame far beyond the borders of India.

- Naga King Chilli or Raja Mircha : It is grown in Nagaland and it is one of the hottest chilies in the world.
- Kaji nemu - Assam

53.Recently, iHub – AWaDH (Agriculture and Water Technology Development Hub) at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Ropar, under the National Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber-Physical Systems (NM-ICPS) launched Bluetooth Low Energy Gateway and Node System.

54. Researchers at IIIT-Delhi have developed AgeXtend, an artificial intelligence (AI)-powered platform designed to discover molecules that could slow down ageing and promote healthier lives.

55. India’s veteran ecologist, Madhav Gadgil has been named as one of the six ‘Champions of the Earth award’ for 2024.
- It was established in 2005 and awarded by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).
- It is the UN’s highest environmental honour, recognises trailblazers at the forefront of efforts to protect people and the planet.

56. The Odisha government is planning to secure a ₹734.86-crore external loan from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) to implement Phase II of the Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) Empowerment and Livelihood Improvement Programme (OPELIP-II).
- IFAD is an international financial institution and a specialized United Nations agency.

57.Prime Minister Narendra Modi laid the foundation stone for the Ken-Betwa river-linking project in Madhya Pradesh’s Khajuraho. 
- The project aims to transfer excess water from the Ken River in Madhya Pradesh to the Betwa River. It is expected to bring prosperity to the Bundelkhand region.
- The project includes a 221-km canal with a 2-km tunnel.
- It aims to irrigate 10.62 lakh hectares and supply drinking water to 62 lakh people.

58. The FDA has approved Tirzepatide, marketed as Zepbound, for treating Obstructive Sleep Apnoea (OSA). The drug is recommended alongside a low-calorie diet and increased physical activity for individuals with moderate to severe OSA. 

59. One of the world's most active volcanoes Hawaii's Kilauea is erupting again.
- Location: Southern part of Hawaii's Big Island, within Hawai'i Volcanoes National Park, U.S.A.
Shield volcano : Definition: A type of volcano characterized by broad, gentle slopes formed from highly fluid basalt lava.
- Unlike conical peaks of composite volcanoes, shield volcanoes appear elongated and dome-shaped.
- Eruptions are usually low in explosivity, forming cinder cones and spatter cones at vents.
- Explosions occur only if water enters the vent. Examples: Hawaiian shield volcanoes like Kilauea and Mauna Loa.
- Dhinodhar Hills (Gujarat): Extinct volcano.
- Dhosi Hill (Haryana): Ancient volcanic site with historical significance.

60. The President of India will present the Pradhan Mantri Rashtriya Bal Puraskar to 17 children on December 26.
  - It is the highest civilian honor for children in India.
 - The Pradhan Mantri Rashtriya Bal Puraskar organized by The Ministry of Women and Child Development Government of India
 - It is awarded annually to children for exceptional achievements in seven categories:
Art & Culture, Bravery, Innovation, Science & Technology, Social Service, Sports, and Environment.
 - Number of Award will be 25, however, any relaxation to this maximum number may be permitted at the discretion of the National Selection Committee.
 - 1 lac rs highest award

61. The Prime Minister of India will distribute over 50 lakh property cards under SVAMITVA Scheme on 27th December.
- The Survey of Villages and Mapping with Improvised Technology in Village Areas (SVAMITVA) is a central sector scheme launched in 2020.
- Nodal Ministry: The Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) is the Nodal Ministry for implementation of the scheme. 

62. 343 years after its extinction, Kashmir artisans give wings to the dodo in papier mache. Kashmiri Papier-mâché is a traditional handicraft of the Kashmir Valley.
It was introduced in the 14th century by Muslim saint Mir Sayyid Ali Hamadani from Persia.
- Dodos, extinct since 1681, are the national emblem of Mauritius, making these items culturally significant.

63. The Kerala High Court issued directives to ensure the safety and well-being of elephants and artists during the Thrissur Pooram festival.
- Historical origin: Initiated by Raja Rama Varma, famously known as Sakthan Thampuran, the Maharaja of Cochin (1790–1805).

64. The Union minister for road transport and highways inaugurated a 1km stretch of Asia's first highway with a bio-bitumen blended surface.
- It is a petroleum-free alternative to bitumen, or asphalt.

- It’s made using non-petroleum-based renewable resources and can be made from vegetable oils, synthetic polymers, or both, making it a more sustainable model long term.

65. Sagar Island in West Bengal where the iconic Gangasagar Mela takes place every January is getting impacted by climate change.
- It is also known as Ganga Sagar or Sagardwip is located in the Ganges delta, lying on the continental shelf of Bay of Bengal.
It consists of 43 villages. Sagar and Mahisani Islands are separated by River Muriganga Batala.

- The Kapil Muni temple on the island is a popular pilgrim centre.

66. Former Supreme Court judge Justice Madan B. Lokur was appointed Chairperson of the United Nations Internal Justice Council (IJC) for a term ending on November 12, 2028.
- UN internal justice council was established by the UN General Assembly as part of the new internal justice system in order to help ensure independence, professionalism and accountability in the administration of the justice system of the United Nations.
- The IJC members are appointed by the Secretary General.
- It is composed of five members consisting of i) A staff representative  ii) A management representative
iii) Two distinguished external jurists, one nominated by the staff and one by management, and Chaired by a distinguished jurist chosen by consensus by the four other members.

67. The Madhya Pradesh government has announced the translocation of 15 tigers to the states of Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, and Odisha.

68. The Delhi High Court has recently ordered signing of an MoU between Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the Delhi Government for implementing PM- Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM) scheme in the national capital.
- It is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) with some Central Sector Components (CS) which has an outlay of Rs. 64,180 Crores for the scheme period (2021-22 to 2025-26).
- This is the largest pan-India scheme for strengthening healthcare infrastructure across the country.


68. 'Surya Kiran' is a joint military exercise between the Indian army and Nepal army. 18th edtion will be held at Saljhandi, Nepal.  // defense


69. The Minister for Ports, Shipping and Waterways recently said cargo-handling capacity at Indian ports increased by 87 percent in the last nine years, with Tamil Nadu’s Kamarajar Port registering a whopping swell of 154 percent.
- Kamarajar Port, formerly known as Ennore Port, is located approximately 24 km north of Chennai in Tamil Nadu, India.
- It is the 12th major port of India and the first port in India which is a public company. 


70. Pobitora wildlife sanctuary is located in east region of Guwahati, Assam.

71. A sharp increase in norovirus outbreaks has been reported in the US this winter.
- Norovirus is a common and highly contagious virus that causes inflammation in the stomach and intestines, a condition known as gastroenteritis.

72. Fort William in Kolkata renamed to Vijay Durg.

73. Maharastra will establish india's first AI University.

74. Bart de wever took oath as PM of Belgium.

75. 2025 QUAD summit in USA.

76. Kaamya Karthikeyan, a 17-year-old student from Mumbai, became the youngest female to conquer the Seven Summits.

77. Tamil Nadu Chief Minister MK Stalin inaugurated India’s first-ever glass bridge in Kanniyakumari, connecting the Vivekananda Rock Memorial and the Thiruvalluvar Statue.

78. Chhattisgarh has become the first Indian state to adopt the Green GDP model, integrating ecological services of forests into its economic framework.

79. The Kagyed Chaam Dance Festival in Gangtok, Sikkim, is a significant Buddhist celebration held annually at Tsuklakhang Palace.

80. On Good Governance Day, Gujarat Chief Minister Bhupendra Patel launched the SWAR (Speech and Written Analysis Resource) platform to enhance communication
and accessibility for citizens

81. Noted Hindi writer Suryabala’s 2018 novel Kaun Des Ko Vasi: Venu Ki Diary has been awarded the 34th Vyas Samman 2024 by the KK Birla Foundation. The novel explores the cultural and ideological conflicts faced by Indian youth abroad, particularly in America.

- 4 lac cash prize , plaque and citation is given







********************** January 2025 *************

1. ISRO  launched US satellite , Bluebird satellite of AST Spacemobile that enables voice calls via smartphones from space.


1.1 Bharatpol- ONLINE PORTAL FOR INTERNATIONAL POLICE COOPERATION developed by CBI. Launched By: Union Home Minister Shri Amit Shah

Focus Areas of Crime - Cybercrime , Financial crimes , Online radicalization • Organized crimes • Drug trafficking • Human trafficking


2. A four-day faunal survey conducted at the Shendurney Wildlife Sanctuary has added significant findings to the sanctuary’s biodiversity records.
 - It is located in the southern part of the Western Ghats in the Kollam district of Kerala.
 - Drainage: The major rivers are Shendurney, Kazhuthuruthy, and Kulathupuzha, which join together to form the Kallada River.
 - Agasthyamalai Biosphere Reserve includes three wildlife sanctuaries namely Shendurney, Peppara and Neyyar. 

3. Researchers from the Centre for Advanced Studies in Botany, North-Eastern Hill University, Shillong discovered a new plant species and named it Stellaria bengalensis.
4. Recently, as many as 179 people were killed when Jeju Air flight 7C2216 made a belly-landing in South Korea.

5. The P-7 Heavy Drop Parachute System is a military system that allows the Indian Armed Forces to airdrop supplies, vehicles, and heavy equipment from aircraft.

6. The government recently announced the formation of an 18-member panel headed by NITI Aayog member Ramesh Chand to revise the base year of the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) and suggest a road map for switching over to the Producer Price Index (PPI).
- It was established to revise the base year of the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) from 2011-12 to 2022-23.

7. Residents of Pithampur have expressed strong objection to incineration of 377 Metric Tonnes of harmful Union Carbide waste brought from Bhopal.

8. The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) launched  "Space Docking Experiment" (SpaDeX) mission from Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC) SHAR in Sriharikota.
- The primary objective of the SpaDeX mission is to develop and demonstrate the technology needed for rendezvous, docking and undocking of two small spacecraft.
- Two small spacecraft- SDX01 (the Chaser) and SDX02 (the Target) will be docked in a 476-km low-Earth circular orbit. PSLV-C60 rocket.

9. Pobitora wildlife sanctuary is located in east region of Guwahati, Assam.

10. Israel launches e-Visa for Indians.

11. Pravashi Bhartiya Divas. The theme for this year is the “Diaspora's contribution to a Viksit Bharat” (Developed India).

- The first Pravasi Bharatiya Divas was celebrated in 2003.

- Pravasi Bharatiya Express, a special state-of-the-art tourist train for the Indian diaspora, from Bhubaneswar, Odisha.

12. Recently, the Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet (GEAPP) signed a Multi-Donor Trust Fund with International Solar Alliance aiming to mobilize $100 million to fund high-impact solar energy projects.

13. The Women Entrepreneurship Platform (WEP) of NITI Aayog, launched EmpowHER Biz – Sapno Ki Udaan in partnership with New Shop, India’s convenience retail chain unit.
- It will offer mentorship and comprehensive training, covering retail management, digital tools, financial literacy and business development to aspiring women entrepreneurs.
- Under the initiative, fifty participants aged 18–35, will be selected through an online application process based on specific criteria.
- The program is being launched for women from Delhi NCR, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, and Gujarat.

14. Karnataka Forest Department has launched the ‘Garudakshi’ online FIR system to curb forest encroachments, illegal tree-felling, poaching, and unauthorised entry into forest areas.
- It is developed in collaboration with the WildLife Trust of India (WTI).

15. Soapstone is also known as Steatite.
- It is a metamorphic rock made of talc, a naturally occurring mineral, and is used in construction and design for countertops, sinks, hearths, and sculptures.

16. AnemiaPhone, a technology developed by Cornell University researchers, has been transferred to the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) for integration into its programmes.

- It is a technology developed by Cornell University (United States) researchers to accurately, quickly, and cheaply assess iron deficiency.

17. Researchers recently developed the first nanobody-based inhibitors targeting the Ebola virus.
- Orthoebolaviruses were discovered in 1976 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and are found primarily in sub-Saharan Africa.

18. The Z-Morh tunnel is set to become the first major milestone in the effort to build a strategic corridor between Kashmir and Ladakh which is open all through the year, with the Prime Minister slated to inaugurate it.

- The 14.15 km Zoji La Tunnel is an under construction 2 lane road project between Sonamarg and Drass on the Srinagar-Leh Highway in Jammu and Kashmir. It aims to ensure all-weather connectivity between Srinagar, Sonmarg and Kargil in Ladakh.

19. The plunging polar vortex brought subfreezing temperatures to some of the southernmost points of the United States recently.
- The polar vortex is a large area of low pressure and cold air surrounding both of the Earth’s poles. 

- The polar vortex extends from the tropopause (the dividing line between the stratosphere and troposphere) through the stratosphere and into the mesosphere (above 50 km).
- The term "vortex" refers to the counter-clockwise flow of air that helps keep the colder air near the Poles.

- It always exists near the poles, but weakens in summer and strengthens in winter.

20. India's ranking has dropped five places – from 80th to 85th – in the list of the world's most powerful passports, according to the Henley Passport Index 2025.

21. The Prime Minister of India lauded the successful completion of the Genome India Project, calling it a historic step in India's research landscape.
- It is a national initiative started in January 2020 to map the genetic diversity of India's population.
- It aims to decode the genetic diversity of India's population through large scale genome sequencing.

22. Anji Khad Bridge is India’s first cable-stayed rail bridge, located in the Reasi district of Jammu and Kashmir.

- A critical component of the ambitious Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramulla Rail Link (USBRL) Project, this engineering marvel connects Katra and Reasi.

- It is constructed over the Anji River, a tributary of the Chenab River.

23. Around 56,000 sq. meters of Dense Forests were created in Prayagraj in the last two years using Miyawaki Technique in preparation for Mahakumbh 2025.

24. India and the U.S. recently announced cooperation on the co-production of U.S. sonobuoys for Undersea Domain Awareness (UDA) for the Indian Navy, a high-end technology that allows tracking submarines in the deep seas and oceans.
- Sonobuoys are expendable, electro-mechanical acoustic sensors that relay underwater sounds emitted from ships and submarines.

25. e-Sharam portal is a flagship initiative by the Government of India to support and empower the unorganized workforce.
- It was launched by the Ministry of Labour and Employment on 26th August 2021.

26. In a remarkable journey across Maharashtra, a male tiger born in the Tipeshwar Wildlife Sanctuary in Yavatmal has travelled an unusual 500 kilometres, reaching Solapur district of Maharashtra.
27. Umred-Pauni-Karhandla Wildlife Sanctuary is spread over Pauni tehsil in Bhandara district and Umred, Kuhi, and Bhivapur Taluka of Nagpur district in Maharashtra.
- The forest along the Wainganga River connects this sanctuary to the Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve. 
- The Wainganga River and the Gose Khurd Damlie along the northeast boundaries of the sanctuary, while State Highway 9 and Bhiwapur Town bound the southern side.

28. A group of divers exploring marine life near Kalpeni Island in the Lakshadweep archipelago discovered what appears to be the wreckage of a European warship from the 17th or 18th century.
- It is a village located within the Lakshadweep archipelago in the Arabian Sea, covering an area of 2.79 square kilometers. 

29. In May 2015, the Indian government introduced the UJALA scheme, which is also known as the LED-based Domestic Efficient Lighting Programme (DELP), to promote energy efficiency in all households.
- The Unnat Jyoti by Affordable LEDs for All (UJALA) scheme, launched in January 2015, has completed a decade with the distribution of 36.87 crore LED bulbs, resulting in ₹19,153 crore in annual electricity savings, according to official data released by the Ministry of Power.

- The UJALA scheme is the world’s largest zero-subsidy LED lamp distribution scheme.
- It is implemented by Energy Efficiency Services Limited (EESL) under the Ministry of Power.

30. Twigstats is a time-stratified ancestry analysis tool that boosts the statistical power of existing methods by a magnitude and reduces statistical errors.

- It is coded in C++ and employs the statistical language R.

31. Recently, the Toda tribe residing in the Nilgiris Hills of Tamil Nadu, celebrated their traditional 'Modhweth' festival to mark the New Year.
- It is one of the oldest ethnic groups residing in the Upper Nilgiris plateau in Tamil Nadu.
- The Todas are divided into five clans, namely: Paiki, Pekkan, Kuttan, Kenna and Todi.

32. IMD launched MAUSAM, an integrated GIS-based mobile app offering weather services such as hourly forecasts, Rainfall, Humidity, Sunrise/Sunset, Moonrise/Moonset, Rain Alert, Lightning Alert, Cyclone Alert, and more. 

33. China has completed the Tianshan Shengli Tunnel, the world's longest expressway tunnel at 22.13 kilometers. It forms part of the Urumqi-Yuli Expressway.

34. Eurodrone or Medium Altitude Long Endurance Remotely Piloted Aircraft System (MALE RPAS) is a twin-turboprop MALE unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV).

- It is part of Europe’s collective defence strategy, reducing reliance on US and Israeli platforms such as the Reaper and Heron drones, respectively. 
- Recently, India has joined the Eurodrone programme as an observer state.

35. DRDO successfully conducts scramjet engine ground test for hypersonic missiles.

36. Pangsau Pass or Pan Saung Pass, 3,727 feet (1,136 m) in altitude, lies on the crest of the Patkai Hills on the India-Myanmar border.

37. India's space agency,Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), has rolled out its Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) rocket, carrying the NVS-02 satellite, as part of the NavIC navigation system.

38. The Shompen habitat is also an important biological hotspot, and there are two National Parks and one Biosphere Reserve, namely Campbell Bay National Park, Galathea National Park, and Great Nicobar Biosphere Reserve.

- Andaman Islands are home to four 'Negrito' tribes – the Great Andamanese, Onge, Jarawa, and Sentinelese. Whereas the Nicobar Islands are home to two 'Mongoloid' tribes – the Shompen and Nicobarese.

39. Blue Carbon is the carbon captured by the world's ocean and coastal ecosystems.
 - Green carbon is the carbon stored by terrestrial ecosystems, including forests and other land-based vegetation.
- Purple Carbon captured through the air or industrial emissions.

- brown carbon is released by the combustion of organic matter

40. The Union government has decided to expand the ambit of the PM Fasal Bima Yojana to include crop damage by animals as a ground for payouts, a long-standing demand by farmers, an official said recently.

41. Recently, Indore and Udaipur have become the first two Indian cities to join the global list of wetland accredited cities.

- It is a voluntary accreditation scheme that provides an opportunity for cities that value their natural or human-made wetlands to gain international recognition and positive publicity for their efforts.
-It was approved during the Ramsar Convention COP12 held in the year 2015.

-The Wetland City Accreditation is valid for 6 years, after which it must be renewed, providing that it continues to fill each of the 6 criteria

42. Scientists recently detected 'supersonic winds' travelling at a speed of 33,000 km per hour on a giant gaseous planet named WASP-127b.

- It is a large gaseous exoplanet, located in our Milky Way galaxy.

- It was discovered in 2016

43. Recently, Andhra Pradesh's eco-friendly wooden Etikoppaka Toys earn accolades at Republic Day parade.

-These are known as Etikoppaka Bommalu, the exquisite wooden toys are rooted in a 400-year-old tradition of craftsmanship. 

- The artisans mainly use the wood from trees known as 'ankudu' (Wrightia Tinctoria) that is soft in nature.

44. Baltic Sea is youngest seas in world. formed aroung 15000-10000 years ago.
-Gotland, located off the coast of Sweden, is the largest island in the Baltic Sea.

45. The Greater Noida authority recently prepared a project to help protect and conserve the Surajpur wetland.

- It is an excellent example of an urban wetland in the Yamuna River basin.

46. Best Marching Contingent among Services: Jammu & Kashmir Rifles Contingent

Best tableu award republic day 2025

- Uttar Pradesh: Mahakumbh 2025 – Swarnim Bharat: Virasat aur Vikas

- Tripura: Eternal Reverence: The Worship of 14 Deities in Tripura – Kharchi Puja

- Andhra Pradesh: Etikoppaka Bommalu – Eco-Friendly Wooden Toys

Best Tableau from Central Ministries/Departments (Judges’ Choice):

- Ministry of Tribal Affairs: Janjatiya Gaurav Varsh

- Indonesian President Prabowo Subianto will be the chief guest at India’s 2025 Republic Day parade.


47. Join Miliatry Exercise Cylone-2025 between India and Egypt, taking place at the Mahajan Field Firing Range in Rajasthan.  // defense

- CINBAX - between india and Cambodia in Pune. 

48.  Gujarat’s Jamnagar district hosted India’s inaugural census of coastal and wader birds. This significant event aimed to enhance understanding of
bird populations and their habitats along the state’s coastline.

- Marine National Park and Sanctuary in Jamnagar, India’s first designated marine national park.

49. 'Nadi Tarangini' is First Ayurvedic Diagnostic Service  to receive CDSCO approval.

- Developed to speed up traditional Ayurvedic practices using AI-powered technology. Manufacturer: Atreya Innovations, based in Hinjewadi, Pune. 

50. India’s ranking in the Henley Passport Index for 2025 has dropped to 85th. best ranking was 71st in 2006.

51. 2024 became the first year in recorded history when the mean global temperature exceeded the critical 1.5°C threshold above pre-industrial levels, as reported by the Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S).

52. PM Inaugurated Z-Morh Tunnel, Boosting Kashmir-Ladakh connectivity.
- Zojila Tunnel: Will be Asia’s longest tunnel, improving travel between Ganderbal (Kashmir) and Kargil (Ladakh).

53. California wild fires- Santa Ana winds

54. On January 5, 2025, PM Narendra Modi inaugurated a 13- km section of the Delhi-Meerut Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS), connecting Sahibabad (Uttar Pradesh) to
New Ashok Nagar (Delhi).

55. On January 6, 2025, Prime Minister Narendra Modi virtually inaugurated the Jammu Railway Division, the 69th division under the Northern Railway Zone.

56. Aero India 2025 in Bengaluru under the theme “The Runway to a Billion Opportunities.” 

57. The 2025 Tibet Earthquake, measuring 7.1 on the Richter scale, struck the Tibetan Plateau on January 5, 2025.

58. IIT Madras has partnered with the Ministry of Agriculture to launch Project VISTAAR, aimed at digitalizing India's agricultural extension system.

59. The Telangana government has expanded the Rythu Bharosa scheme to provide ₹7,500 per acre for each crop season to about 70 lakh farmers.

60. Jasprit Bumrah became the fastest Indian bowler to reach 200 wickets in Test cricket during the Border-Gavaskar Trophy at the MCG in Melbourne.

- Koneru Humpy- chess

61. India will host the first-ever World Audio Visual Entertainment Summit (WAVES) in New Delhi from February 5-9, 2024. Announced by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

62.  Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) has been re-certified as a ‘Great Place to Work’ for the period January 2025 to January 2026, marking its second consecutive certification

63. Prativa Satpathy, an acclaimed Odia poet and Sahitya Akademi Award winner, will receive the Gangadhar National Award for Poetry 2023 on January 5, 2025, during
Sambalpur University’s 58th foundation day.

65. The Indian government has awarded the Major Dhyan Chand Khel Ratna Award 2024 to Manu Bhaker (Shooting) , Harmanpreet Singh (Hockey) for leading India to a second consecutive Olympic bronze, Praveen Kumar (Para Athletics) for clinching gold at the Paris Paralympics, and D Gukesh.

66. The Indian Army unveiled a statue of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj at Pangong Tso in Ladakh on December 26, 2024, symbolizing India's strategic and cultural assertion near the India-China border.      // defense

67. Manish Singhal has been appointed as the new Secretary General of the Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), one of India’s oldest
business chambers, established in 1920.

68. Arjuna awards in 32 sports.	

69. Cabinet Approves Seven Major Schemesto Enhance Farmers’ Lives and Livelihoods , total financial outlay 13,966 crore.

 1. Digital Agriculture Mission (₹2,817 crore)                    2. Crop Science for Food and Nutritional Security (₹3,979 crore)

 3. Strengthening Agricultural Education, Management, and Social Sciences (₹2,291 crore)

 4. Sustainable Livestock Health and Production (₹1,702 crore)        5. Sustainable Development of Horticulture (₹860 crore)     
 
 6. Strengthening of Krishi Vigyan Kendra (₹1,202 crore)               7. Natural Resource Management (₹1,115 crore)

70. Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M.K. Stalin announced a $1 million prize for deciphering the Indus Valley script, marking the centenary of the Indus Valley Civilization discovery.

71.  The Assam government launched Gunotsav 2025, an education evaluation program aimed at improving learning outcomes for 14.11 lakh students in 16,056 schools.

72. The Uttar Pradesh government has partnered with Google Cloud (India) to launch the Uttar Pradesh Open Network for Agriculture (UPONA), powered by Gemini AI and Beacon technology. 

73. Indusfood 2025, Asia’s premier food and beverage trade exhibition, will be held from January 8-10, 2025, in Greater Noida, India. 

74. Indonesia has officially joined BRICS as its 10th member, strengthening the group’s presence in Southeast Asia.

75. Prime Minister Narendra Modi will attend the AI Action Summit in Paris on February 10-11, 2025, hosted by French President Emmanuel Macron.

76. The Abdali Missile (Hatf 2) is a short-range, road-mobile ballistic missile developed by Pakistan Space Research Commission (SUPARCO)

77. The National Commission for Women (NCW), in partnership with the Lok Sabha Secretariat and Ministry of Tribal Affairs, launched ‘Panchayat Se Parliament 2.0’ at
Samvidhan Sadan to mark Bhagwan Birsa Munda’s 150th birth anniversary.

78. On January 7, 2025, Odisha CM Mohan Charan Majhi launched the 'Shahid Madho Singh Haath Kharcha Scheme' to reduce dropout rates among Scheduled Tribe (ST)
students. 
-The scheme offers ₹5,000 financial assistance to students enrolling in Class IX and Class XI, with an annual family income limit of ₹2,50,000.

79. On January 4, 2025, PM Narendra Modi inaugurated the Grameen Bharat Mahotsav 2025 at Bharat Mandapam, New Delhi, organized by DFS and NABARD.

80. PARTH Yojana is a scheme launched in Madhya Pradesh to provide pre-recruitment training for youth aiming to join the Indian Army, Police, and Para-Military forces.

81. On January 7, 2025, Goa CM Dr. Pramod Sawant launched the Bima Sakhi Yojana under Swayampurna Goa 2.0 to empower women by training them as LIC agents. 

82. Three frontline combatants were commissioned into the Indian Navy at the Naval Dockyard in Mumbai: INS Nilgiri, the lead ship of the Project 17A stealth frigate class; INS Surat, the fourth and final ship of the Project 15B stealth destroyer class; and INS Vaghsheer, the sixth and final Scorpene-class submarine.

- INS Surat is India's First AI-Enabled Warship: Utilizes indigenously developed artificial intelligence solutions for enhanced operational efficiency.

- build by MDL.
83. The Swami Vivekananda Yuva Shakti Mission was launched by Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Mohan Yadav on National Youth Day on 12 January 2025.
Mission Objective: To employ 70% of the youth by 2028 and to provide education to all youth up to class 12th by 2030.

84. The Mahatma Jyotiba Phule Jan Arogya Yojana aims to provide quality healthcare to economically disadvantaged sections of society in Maharashtra. cashless medical treatment

85. The Nagoba Jatara festival in Keslapur, Telangana, drew nearly one lakh devotees from across India to celebrate the Nagoba temple.

86. Launched on January 29, 2025, Alibaba Qwen AI claims its new AI model surpasses DeepSeek, ChatGPT, and Llama.

87. On January 28, 2025, Tripura became the first northeastern state to sign an MoU with the Digital India Bhashini Division (DIBD) of MeitY.

88. Alexander Lukashenko won a seventh term as President of Belarus.

89. 'The Subhadra Scheme', launched by the Odisha Government’s Women and Child Development Department, empowers women through financial support, digital literacy, and access to social safety nets.

90. The Sci-Fi Science Film Festival of India was inaugurated by Goa Chief Minister Pramod Sawant on January 30,2025, in Panaji.

91. UAE President Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan declared 2025 as the “Year of Community” with the slogan “Hand in Hand” to promote unity and inclusion.

92. The Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA) issued notices to Ola and Uber over claims of differential pricing based on mobile operating systems,

93. On January 24, 2025, the Government of India appointed Jitender Pal Singh as the next Ambassador to Israel.

94. Shri Hariman Sharma, a farmer from Himachal Pradesh, has been awarded the Padma Shri for developing the HRMN-99 apple variety, which revolutionized apple cultivation.

95. Australia won the ICC Women’s Championship for the 3rd consecutive time, securing 39 points from 24 matches

96. The Khelo India Winter Games (KIWG) 2025 first phase concluded with Ladakh topping the medal tally with seven medals, including four golds


97. Lieutenant Governor Manoj Sinha was awarded the Maharaja Hari Singh Award at a ceremony in Jammu.

98. The Indian short film 'Anuja' has been nominated for Best Live Action Short Film at the 97th Academy Awards

99. On National Girl Child Day 2025, Haryana Cabinet Minister Shruti Choudhry launched the ‘Samman Sanjeevani’ app to improve the ‘Mahila Evam Kishori
Samman Yojana’

100. Matsya- 6000 - India's first human-operated underwater submersible as part of the Deep Ocean Mission, designed for 6000 metr.

101. Andhra Pradesh govt. launches ‘Mana Mitra’ - Governance, 161 civil services to be delivered through WhatsApp 

102. Sarla Aviation has unveiled 'Shunya,' India’s first electric vertical take-off and landing (eVTOL) air taxi. Designed for short trips of 20-30 km, it can carry six passengers with a speed of 250 km/h. The prototype aims to ease traffic congestion and promote sustainable urban transport.


103. India will host the BRICS Youth Council Entrepreneurship Working Group Meeting from March 3-7, 2025.




                                                ********************** February 2025 *************

1.1. Indian Coast Guard (ICG) celebrated its 49th Raising Day on February 01, 2025.

- started in 1977 , motto ‘Vayam Rakshamah’ (We Protect) 

1.2. Recently, the Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA), in collaboration with the Lokmata Ahilyabai Trishatabdi Samaroh Samiti, organized a special lecture on the life and legacy of Devi Ahilyabai Holkar.

- Maharani Ahilyabai Holkar (31 May 1725 – 13 August 1795) was the Holkar Queen of the Maratha Malwa kingdom, India.

1.3. Indonesia’s Mount Dukono erupted on February 20, 2025, sending a 2,000-meter-high ash cloud into the sky. Authorities issued an orange-level aviation warning (VONA), advising aircraft to avoid the area due to potential hazards.

2. India and Nepal have strengthened their scientific collaboration with a new MoU signed between CSIR (India) and NAST (Nepal) on February 18, 2025. This agreement aims to expand joint research, technology exchange, and capacity-building in fields like biotechnology, and material sciences.

3. The Union Home Minister addressed the closing ceremony of the 38th National Games in Haldwani, Uttarakhand, highlighting the development in India’s sports infrastructure. 

- About 38th National Games: It was held from 28th January to 14th February 2025 in Uttarakhand.  

- Mascot: The mascot of the games was Mouli, inspired by Uttarakhand's state bird, the Monal. Theme is 'Green games' , tagline is 'sankalp se shikhar tak'.

- India's sports budget grew from Rs 800 crore in 2014 to Rs 3,800 crore by 2025-26. 

- Top Performers: Services Sports Control Board (1st), Maharashtra (2nd), and Haryana (3rd). 


- The 39th National Games will be held in Meghalaya. 

3.1* The Indian Army, in partnership with the Indian Coast Guard and Marine Police, carried out the extensive military exercise 'Jal-Thal-Raksha 2025' at Bet Dwarka, Gujarat. The exercise focused on bolstering island security, preventing illegal encroachment, and improving coordination among security for  //defense

4. The central government plans to change the Animal Welfare Board's old guidelines to make them more relevant in the current scenario as well as ensure their effective implementation as part of efforts to prevent cruelty towards animals. 

- It is a statutory body set up in 1962 in accordance with Section 4 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1960.

- The Board consists of 28 Members.

- The term of office of Members is for a period of 3 years.

5. Doomsday Fish : It is also known as Orafish and the “sea serpent” is a deep-sea dweller that rarely comes near the surface was seen in mexico.

5.1. Grammy awards : Album of the Year Beyoncé – “Cowboy Carter” , Song of the Year Kendrick Lamar – “Not Like Us”

5.2. MeitY and IIT Indore launched AgriHub, an AI-driven Center of Excellence (CoE), to transform Indian agriculture.

5.3 Maharashtra is establishing India’s first AI university to advance AI education, research, and innovation.

5.4 Union Minister Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan launched the “Watershed Yatra” campaign to raise awareness and encourage participation in watershed development activities under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (WDC-PMKSY 2.0.

5.5 On February 2, 2025, Johannesburg inaugurated the largest Hindu temple in the Southern Hemisphere as part of the BAPS Multi-Cultural Centre.

5.6 The Election Commission of India (ECI) has launched the ‘Chandrayaan Se Chunao Tak’ initiative in West Delhi to boost voter awareness and participation.

5.7 The HP  government, under CM Sukhvinder Singh Sukhu, has approved a pilot project for cannabis (hemp) farming.

5.8 HP launched North India’s first Green Hydrogen Plant in Dabhota, Nalagarh, with a 1 MW capacity.

5.9 The United Kingdom is the first country to criminalize AIgenerated child sexual abuse material (CSAM).

5.10 'Tshego Gaelae' a 34-year-old attorney from Soweto, has made history as the first Black woman to win the Mrs World 2025 title in Las Vegas.

6.  Hague Service Convention, formally known as the Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, 1965, was adopted at the Hague Conference on Private International Law in 1965.

- to tackle cross border litigation. 84 members including India and usa.

- India acceded to the Convention on November 23, 2006, with certain reservations, expressly opposing all alternative service methods under Article 10. 


7. anti retroviral therapy  is treatment of people infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) using anti-HIV drugs

7.1 China has launched an antitrust investigation into Google, initiated by the State Administration for Market Regulation (SAMR).

7.2 Panama has withdrawn from China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), signaling a shift in its foreign policy

7.3 On 6th February 2025, NITI Aayog hosted the conclave "Towards Viksit Bharat @ 2047" in New Delhi. 

7.4 Argentina has announced its withdrawal from the WHO following the United States's earlier decision under President Donald Trump. 

7.5 GMR Airports Ltd (GAL) has joined the United Nations Global Compact (UNGC), committing to sustainability and responsible business practices.

7.6 The International Buddhist Confederation (IBC) is launching the Lord Buddha Trination Tri services Expedition, a historic motorcycle journey involving the
armed forces of India, Nepal, and Sri Lanka.

7.7 Pakistan’s SUPARCO has partnered with CNSA for the Chang’e-8 lunar mission in 2028, marking Pakistan’s first major involvement in lunar exploration.

7.8 The Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) and NITI Aayog launched the ‘Swavalambini’ initiative on February 7, 2025, targeting women
entrepreneurship in Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram.

7.9 The Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) successfully launched the fifth H-3 rocket carrying the Michibiki No. 6 satellite from the Tanegashima Space
Center.

7.10 In January 2025, Karnataka became the first Indian state to implement the Supreme Court's directive on the "right to die with dignity," allowing terminally ill patients to opt for passive euthanasia, with a two-tier medical board and judicial approval process. 


8. Animal Welfare Board of India :It is a statutory body set up in 1962 in accordance with Section 4 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1960.

- Headquarters: Chennai


9. Blood Moon : A full moon that coincides with a full lunar eclipse and that has an unusually reddish appearance.

9.1 The 38th Surajkund Mela will happen from February 7 to February 23, 2025. This 15-day festival will showcase amazing art, culture and traditions from India and around the world.
-  For 2025, Rajasthan is the theme state

- The Surajkund Mela is one of the largest craft fairs in the world.

- In 2013 it was upgraded to international level.

9.2 Karnataka has been declared naxal free states.

9.3 Odisha CM  Mohan Charan Majhi launched the ‘Bikashita Gaon Bikashita Odisha’ (BGBO) scheme in Jankia village ,Khordha district, aiming to boost rural infrastructure.

9.4 Kerala has launched nPROUD (New Programme for Removal of Unused Drugs) to safely collect and dispose of expired and unused medicines. The initiative, starting as a pilot in Kozhikode and Ulliyeri, involves household collections, pharmacy drop-offs, and special drives.

9.5 Prime Minister Narendra Modi delivered a video message at the SAMVAD programme in Thailand, emphasizing India's cultural ties with Thailand and Asia.

- Theme: Asian century of dharma-dhamma , held in Bangkok and ayuthayya.

9.6 India has secured 3rd position globally in the US Green Building Council’s (USGBC) annual ranking.

9.7 The International Cricket Council (ICC) has launched the ‘Donate Organs, Save Lives’ campaign to raise organ donation awareness.

9.8 India ranked 22nd in the International Shipments category and 38th overall in the World Bank’s Logistics Performance Index (LPI) 2023.

9.9 Kyrian Jacquet of France won his first ATP title by clinching the 2025 Chennai Open men’s singles title, defeating Elias Ymer of Sweden in the final on February 9, 2025

10. Researchers from the west Maharashtra region recently discovered a new endemic species of frog named ‘Minervarya ghatiborealis'.

- It was found at the hill station Mahabaleshwar in the north-western Ghats of Sahyadri in Maharashtra.

10.1. Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) , health workers

10.2 The West Bengal government has launched the “Nodi Bandhan” scheme and allocated funds for the Ghatal Masterplan in the 2025-26 budget. 

- The Nodi Bandhan scheme focuses on riverine development, erosion prevention along the Ganga-Padma.

10.3 The 14th Asian Fisheries and Aquaculture Forum (14AFAF) will be held from February 12-14, 2025, at ICAR Convention Centre, New Delhi, with the theme "Greening the Blue Growth in Asia-Pacific

10.4 President Droupadi Murmu inaugurated an international conference on Unani medicine on February 11, 2025, at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi.

10.5 Rakesh Roshan will receive the ‘Outstanding Achievement in Indian Cinema’ award at IIFA 2025 for his significant contributions as a director, producer, and actor.

10.6 NTPC Ltd., India's largest power utility, won the Forward Faster Sustainability Award 2025 in the Water Resilience category.

10.7 The World Government Summit (WGS) 2025 was held in Dubai from February 11-13, focusing on “Shaping Future Governments.”

10.8 India is hosting the IIAS-DARPG India Conference 2025 in New Delhi from February 10-14, 2025.

10.9 Varsha Bharath’s directorial debut, Bad Girl, has won the prestigious NETPAC Award atthe International Film Festival Rotterdam (IFFR) 2025

11. Recently, a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket lifted off from the Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral carrying NASA’s Lunar Trailblazer orbiter. 

- Objective: It is being sent to find and map water on the moon’s surface.

12. 'Mount Fentale' volcano in Ethiopia is spewing unusually large volumes of methane from its crater, according to satellite measurements of the potent greenhouse gas.

- It is a stratovolcano located in Awash National Park in the Oromia Region, Ethiopia. 

13. NASA is tentatively scheduled to launch its new megaphone-shaped space telescope aboard a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket from Vandenberg Space Force Base in California.

- The Spectro-Photometer for the History of the Universe, Epoch of Reionization and Ices Explorer (SPHEREx) telescope is a megaphone-shaped telescope.

- It will map the universe while detecting two kinds of cosmic light, optical and infrared.

14. The Kundi traditional Water Harvest System is an excellent example of how local knowledge and architectural ingenuity can address environmental challenges in water scarce regions.

- The kundi (also known as a kund) is a traditional rainwater harvesting system that is predominantly found in desert regions in Rajasthan, India.

- Which is the oldest water harvesting system in India? Sringaverapura near Allahabad had a sophisticated water harvesting system using the floodwaters of the Ganges

15. Recently, the Svalbard Global Seed Vault received more than 14,000 new seed samples. Svalbard is the Norwegian archipelago half way between the Northern pole and Mainland Norway.

16. Cholanaikkan Tribe - PVTG - Kerala - Chungathara forest ranges of Western Ghats.
- They are a diminishing tribe of India. With a population of less than 400 members, it is one of the most isolated tribes.

17. Recently, the ‘Cali Fund’ was launched at the resumed 16th Conference of Parties (COP16) to the United Nations Convention on Global Biological Diversity (CBD) in Rome.
- It is a new international fund which has been created to help protect biodiversity.

- cop 30 will take place in Belem, brazil. 

18. Soil Health Card Scheme : launched to assist State Governments to issue soil health cards to all farmers in the country in 2015.

- A farm will get the soil card once in every 3 years.

- Soil Samples are taken generally two times in a year, after harvesting of Rabi and Kharif Crop respectively or when there is no standing crop in the field.

- The Soil Health Card contains status of the soil with respect to 12 parameters, namely N,P,K, S (Macro-nutrients); Zn, Fe, Cu, Mn, Bo (Micro - nutrients) ; and pH (Acidity or Basicity), EC (Electrical Conductivity) and OC (Organic Carbon).

- Soil Health Card scheme has been merged in Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) scheme as one of its components under the name ‘Soil Health & Fertility’ from the year 2022-23.

- Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare launched Soil Health Card.

* PM-KISAN : The Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-Kisan) Yojana came into effect from December 1, 2018.

- Under the scheme, income support of Rs 6000 per annum is provided to all eligible farmer families across the country in three equal instalments of Rs 2,000 each every four months.

- Nodal Ministry - Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare


19. India and Argentina have signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to boost lithium exploration and mining cooperation, particularly focusing on the "Lithium Triangle" region, where Argentina holds significant lithium reserves

19.1 India is introducing new HSN codes for Geographical Indication (GI)-tagged rice varieties like Red Rice, Black Rice, and Kalanamak Rice to improve export processes.

19.2 Vice President Shri Jagdeep Dhankhar launched the book “I Am?”, compiled by Gopichand P. Hinduja, Chairman of the Hinduja Group.

19.3 Arun Shourie has released his significant book, ‘The New Icon: Savarkar and the Facts’, on January 31, 2024.

19.4 The Rajasthan government has renamed two British-era landmarksin Ajmer to honor Indian heritage. Foy Sagar Lake is now Varun Sagar, and King Edward Memorial Bhawan has become Maharishi Dayanand Vishrant Grih.

19.5 Lam Research, a leading semiconductor equipment manufacturer, has announced an investment of over ₹10,000 crore in Karnataka.

19.6 Bangladesh has launched “Operation Devil Hunt”, a largescale security operation targeting loyalists of former Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina .

19.7 India and Nicaragua have signed a MoU to implement Quick Impact Projects (QIPs). 

19.8 Thaipusam 2025, a major festival in Tamil Nadu, is dedicated to Lord Murugan.

19.9 The Haryana government launched the ‘Har Khet-Swasth Khet’ campaign to improve soil health and promote sustainable farming.

20. India and the United States have initiated the Transforming Relationship Utilizing Strategic Technology (TRUST) initiative to enhance cooperation in the recovery and processing of critical minerals, including lithium and rare earth elements (REEs).

20.1 India's rank is 80th in 2025 Henley passport index 2025, Singapore is 1st.

20.2  India ranked 96th out of 180 countries in  corruption perception index, released by Transparency international.

20.3 PM-USHA scheme allocates ₹13,000 crores (2023-26) for SPUs.

21. The Devolution Index (DI) 2024 report, released by the Union Ministry of Panchayati Raj and the Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA), New Delhi, ranks Karnataka as the top-performing state in India’s Panchayat Raj system.

- Following Karnataka in the overall ranking are Kerala (2nd) and Tamil Nadu (3rd), while Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, and Gujarat also feature in the top six.

- The index evaluates states on framework, functions, finances, functionaries, capacity building, and accountability.


22. TRIFED is an organization under the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Government of India, dedicated to the socio-economic development of tribal communities through the marketing development of tribal products.

- It was established in August 1987 under the Multi-State Cooperative Societies Act, 1984, by the Government of India as a national-level cooperative body.

* Dwarf galaxies : They are small galaxies that typically contain just a few billion stars, unlike their larger cousins, which can hold hundreds of billions.

* African-Asian Rural Development Organization :It is an autonomous inter-governmental Organization comprising country governments of Africa and Asia which was established in 1962.

- The organization was set up with a view to promote coordinated efforts, exchange of experiences and cooperative action for furthering the objectives of development of the rural areas.

* Kalakkad – Mundanthurai Tiger Reserve : It is located in the Southern Western Ghats in Tamil Nadu. 

- It includes three main sanctuaries: Kalakad Sanctuary, Mundanthurai Sanctuary, and a part of Kanyakumari Sanctuary.

* Spices Board : It is a statutory body constituted on 26th February 1987 under the Spices Board Act 1986, with the merger of the erstwhile Cardamom Board (1968) and Spices Export Promotion Council (1960). 

- It is one of the five Commodity Boards functioning under the Ministry of Commerce & Industry.
23. Recently, the Government e Marketplace (GeM) commemorated six years of Startups, Women & Youth Advantage through e Transactions (SWAYATT) initiative at New Delhi 

- launched on 19th February, 2019. It was conceptualised with a clear objective of invigorating participation of women-led enterprises and youth in public procurement.

- By ministry of commerce and industry

24. NASA is gearing up for a new and first-of-its-kind solar mission called PUNCH mission that will closely observe the solar atmosphere. 

- The Polarimetry to Unify the Corona and Heliosphere (PUNCH) mission will be launched by SpaceX .

- It is the first time that a solar mission has been specifically designed to make use of the polarisation of light to measure the corona and solar wind, that too, in 3D.

25. Recently, India has dispatched humanitarian assistance of 26 tons to Honduras in the wake of the recent Tropical storm SARA.

- It is located in Central America.

26. Russia recently deployed autonomous launchers of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM) RS-24 Yars on combat patrol routes which are equipped with nuclear weapons. 

27. Former IAS officer Gyanesh Kumar has been appointed as 26th the Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) of India, succeeding Rajiv Kumar. 

- The appointment was made by a Selection Committee comprising Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Home Minister Amit Shah, and Leader of Opposition Rahul Gandhi. 

- The total tenure cannot exceed six years (including service as EC and CEC).

28. Recently, four more wetlands from India have got an international tag of Ramsar Convention sites bringing total to 89.

i) Sakkarakottai Bird Sanctuary - Location: Tamil Nadu - It is a unique mosaic wetland ecosystem located close to the Gulf of Mannar on the Central Asian flyway, a regular route for the migratory birds that comes from Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan.

ii) Therthangal Bird Sanctuary - Tamilnadu

iii) Udhwa Lake - It is the first Ramsar designated wetland from Jharkhand.

iv) Khecheopalri Lake - Location: Sikkim

- Chilika Lake in Orissa and Keoladeo National Park in Rajasthan were recognised as the first Ramsar

- Largest Ramsar site: Sunderban of West Bengal.


29. The Union Budget 2025-26 has announced Bharatiya Bhasha Pushtak Scheme to provide digital-form Indian language books for students.

- It is a new initiative aimed at making learning more accessible by offering digital textbooks and study materials in various Indian languages. 

- This initiative also complements the government’s previous steps to enhance educational infrastructure, such as the ASMITA (Augmenting Study Materials in Indian Languages through Translation and Academic Writing) initiative.

- ASMITA Initiative  is an initiative to develop 22,000 books in Indian languages in the next five years.

30. Recently, the Union Minister for Finance announced the National Manufacturing Mission while presenting the Union Budget 2025-26 in Parliament.

- It covers small, medium and large industries for furthering “Make in India”.

- It will lay emphasis on five focal areas i.e.
 Ease and cost of doing business; future ready workforce for in-demand jobs; a vibrant and dynamic MSME sector; availability of technology; and quality products.

31. The Finance Minister recently said the National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development (NaBFID) will set up a partial credit enhancement facility for corporate bonds in the infrastructure sector.

- NaBFID was set up in 2021, by an Act of the Parliament (The National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development Act, 2021), 

32. Recently, the Gujarat government declared the inland mangrove in Kutch district’s Guneri village as the first Biodiversity Heritage Site of Gujarat.

- It is a natural inland mangrove site located in Kutch district of Gujarat.

33. Recently, the World Health Organization (WHO) congratulates 'Niger' for having met the criteria for onchocerciasis elimination.

- It is commonly known as “river blindness” which is a neglected tropical disease (NTD). 

- Niger became the first African country to eliminate onchocerciasis (river blindness) as a public health threat, joining Colombia, Ecuador, Guatemala, and Mexico in this achievement

34. The Finance Minister recently announced the Pradhan Mantri Dhan Dhanya Krishi Yojana, or the developing agri-districts programme, in  8th Union Budget.

- It is a new initiative aimed at supporting farmers in 100 regions facing challenges in agriculture. 

- The scheme, in collaboration with the state government, aims to cover 100 districts in the country, and around 1.7 crore farmers will benefit from it.


35. Recently, the Finance Minister announced the launch of a National Geospatial Mission in the Budget 2025-26.

- It will be aimed at modernising land records and enhancing urban planning across India.

36. The world's largest iceberg, A23a, is drifting toward South Georgia Island, a remote and ecologically vital wildlife haven, after having been freed from the Filchner Ice Shelf in Antarctica.

37. 51st Khajuraho Dance Festival 2025: A Celebration of Classical Art and Heritage

- 100 dancers perform for over 24 hours (Guinness World Record attempt) on Feb 19-20, 2025, at Aadivart Tribal Museum.

38.  The Nagaland Forest Management Project (NFMP) received the SKOCH Award 2024 for sustainable forest and environmental conservation and improving livelihoods in targeted villages through need-based and village-specific interventions led by joint forest management committees.

39. The Sahitya Akademi Awards 2024 have announced 22 winners, with Bengali and Urdu awards pending, bringing the total to 24. 

- It is the 2nd-highest literary honor in India, after the Jnanpith Award. 

- It was established in 1954 as an autonomous body under the Ministry of Culture. 

-Late Chaman Arora Honored with Sahitya Akademi Award 2024 for Dogri Literature for his book 'ik hor ashwasthama'

40. 67th annual grammy awards by Chandrika tandon for her album 'Triveni'

41. Iran recently unveiled two missiles, named Etemad and Ghadr-380.    // defense

42. Pradhan Mantri Shram Yogi Maandhan Yojana :it is a government scheme meant for the old-age protection and social security of unorganized workers.

- The budget 2025-26 allocation under the PM Shram Yogi Maandhan Yojana increased by 37% compared to last year.

- Age group of 18-40 years

- Monthly income is below Rs. 15000 and not a member of EPFO/ESIC/NPS (Govt. funded).

- Minimum Assured Pension: Each subscriber under the PM-SYM shall receive minimum assured pension of Rs 3000/- per month after attaining the age of 60 years.

43.Deepor Beel : It is a perennial freshwater lake located on the outskirts of Guwahati, Assam. 

- It lies in a former channel of the Brahmaputra River.

44.   On 2nd February 2025 , the union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) organised the World Wetlands Day 2025 celebrations at the Parvati Arga Ramsar Site.

45. Recently, the Ministry of Railways has introduced the SuperApp ‘SwaRail’, a one-stop solution for seamless railway services.

- It integrates various railway services, eliminating the need for multiple applications and reducing space consumption on user devices.

46. The Finance Minister recently announced a ₹20,000 crore ‘Nuclear Energy Mission’ to develop indigenous Small Modular Reactors (SMR).

- SMRs are defined as small nuclear reactors with a maximum output of 300 Megawatt electric (MWe) and can produce 7.2 million kWh per day.

- By comparison, large-size nuclear power plants have an output of over 1,000 MWe and can produce 24 million kWh per day. 

- The government plans to expand India’s nuclear power capacity from 8,180 MW to 22,480 MW by 2031-32.

- Bharat Small Reactors (BSRs) : BSRs are 220 MW Pressurized Heavy Water Reactors (PHWRs) that are designed to meet the growing energy needs of industrial hubs.

47. Recently, DRDO has successfully conducted 3 successive flight-trials of Very Short-Range Air Defence System (VSHORADS) from Chandipur off the coast of Odisha.

48. 'Chhota Bheem', one of the most famous tigers of Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, died while undergoing treatment for multiple fractures at Bhopal's Van Vihar recently.

- It is nestled in the Satpura and Vindhya mountain ranges in the Umaria district of Madhya Pradesh.

49. The Southern Zonal Bench of the National Green Tribunal (NGT) recently restrained the Andhra Pradesh Government from proceeding with the six infrastructure projects in Kolleru wetland area.

- It is a large, natural, shallow, freshwater lake located in northeastern Andhra Pradesh.

- It lies between the Krishna and Godavari deltas near the city of Eluru.

- It is the largest shallow freshwater lake in Asia.

50. GARBHINI-DRISHTI : It is a data dashboard that provides a comprehensive overview of one of South Asia’s largest pregnancy cohort datasets.

51.* The Union Budget 2025-26 announced the 'Gyan Bharatam Mission', under which one crore manuscripts will be conserved and documented.

- It is a special mission for the survey, documentation, and conservation of India’s manuscript heritage lying with academic institutions, museums, libraries, and private collectors.

- Lithographs and printed volumes are not manuscripts.

52. Manohar International Airport (GOX), developed and operated by GMR Goa International Airport Ltd. (GGIAL), has made history by becoming the first airport in India to receive the esteemed “Sarvashrestha Suraksha Puraskar (Golden Trophy).

53. Sunil Bharti Mittal, founder and chairman of Bharti Enterprises, on February 22, was awarded the Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (KBE) in recognition of his contributions to UK-India business relations.

54. Union Minister Dr. Jitendra Singh on Tuesday inaugurated India’s first indigenous Automated Biomedical Waste Treatment Plant at AIIMS New Delhi. The plant, named “Sṛjanam,” was developed by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research – National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology (CSIR-NIIST).

55. Ambergris :It is a waxy substance often called whale vomit which is produced by sperm whales.

- There is a ban on the possession and trade of ambergris in countries like the USA, Australia and India.

- In India, the sale and trade of ambergris are strictly prohibited under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.

56. Extremely Large Telescope (ELT): It will be the world's largest optical telescope, with a primary mirror that measures 128 feet (39 meters) across.

- It is being built by the European Southern Observatory (ESO) in Chile at a cost of 1.3 billion euros (around $1.4 billion)

57. Recently, the Minister of State in the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs provided information about the National Youth Parliament Scheme 2.0 to the Rajya Sabha.

- objective : To strengthen the roots of democracy

58. Thousands of residents have fled the island of Santorini after a swarm of earthquakes shook the Greek islands in the Aegean Sea on Tuesday morning.

- Santorini, or Thera, as it is also known, is a volcanic crater island that is located in the southern part of the Aegean Sea in southeastern Greece. 

59.* Recently, the 13th edition of joint military exercise 'Ekuverin' between the Indian Army and the Maldives National Defence Force has commenced at Maafilaafushi, maldives.  // defense

59.1 TROPEX (Theatre Level Operational Readiness Exercise) is the Indian Navy’s largest maritime exercise, involving the Indian Army, Indian Air Force (IAF), and Indian Coast Guard.

- TROPEX 2025 was held in Indian ocean region.

59.2 The Indian Air Force (IAF) successfully concluded the Mehar Baba Competition-II (MBC-II), focused on advancing India’s unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) capabilities.

59.3 Saab and Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on February 13, 2025.

59.4 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) has renamed its HJT36 jet training aircraft to ‘Yashas’ after extensive upgrades to improve flight characteristics.




60.* The Iskander (Western reporting name: SS-26 Stone) is a road-mobile short-range ballistic missile system developed by Russia.  // defense

- The missiles possess a maximum range of 500 km and carry payloads between 480 and 700 kg.

61. Mount Taranaki (real name - Taranaki Maunga ), now known by its Maori name Taranaki Maunga, in New Zealand has achieved a human status. 

- It is a stratovolcano (also called a composite cone) - and is made up of alternating layers of ash and lava flow.

- Before that urwera native forest in 2014 and Whanghanui river in 2017 were given personhood status.

62. Fort William in Kolkata, the headquarters of the Eastern Army Command, has been renamed 'Vijay Durg' recently.

- Fort William was built by the British in 1773 and was named after King William III of England.

- Today, Fort William is the property of the Indian Army. It also serves as the headquarters of the Eastern Command. 

- The original fort was built by the English East India Company in 1696.

63. Stryker is a family of eight-wheel-drive combat vehicles  built for the US Army.

64. Recently, the finance minister of India announced Grameen credit score scheme in the union budget 2025.

- It aims to formalize self help group (SHG) transactions within the central credit system of India. Thereby allowing leading financial institutions to better assess creditworthiness.

65. The Union Minister for Rural Development and Agriculture launched the 'Naksha Programme' for Land Survey of Urban Settlements in Raisen, Madhya Pradesh. cost 194 crore.

66. The 9th Asia Economic Dialogue (AED) 2025 is set to take place in Pune, Maharashtra, from February 20 to February 22, 2025.

- High-Level Participation: Includes ministers, diplomats, policymakers, and business leaders from countries like Japan, Australia, Egypt, Indonesia, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, and the Netherlands.

67. The Union Cabinet approved the National Critical Mineral Mission (CMM) with an outlay of Rs 16,300 crore.
- The mission focuses on critical minerals like lithium, cobalt, copper, nickel, and rare earth elements

68. The Union Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) granted the Banke Bihari Temple in Vrindavan, Uttar Pradesh, a license under the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act
(FCRA), allowing it to receive foreign funds.

69.The Jammu & Kashmir Forest Research Institute (JKFRI) launched the ‘Digital Tree Aadhar’ initiative to protect and monitor Kashmir’s chinar trees.

70. India's first Ferret Research Facility, the launch of the GARBH-INi-DRISHTI data repository at the Translational Health Science and Technology Institute (THSTI) in the NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, Haryana, on 3rd Feb 2025.

71. Balrampur Chini Mills (BCML) marked a memorable milestone with the foundation stone laying ceremony of India's first Polylactic Acid (PLA) biopolymer manufacturing facility at Kumbhi,Lakhipur kheri district Uttar Pradesh.22 Feb 2025

72. The BIMSTEC Youth Summit 2025 will be held in Gandhinagar, Gujarat, from 7th to 11th February 2025

73. Dubai will host the Global Justice, Love & Peace Summit on April 12-13, 2025, at the Dubai Exhibition Centre.

74. R Praggnanandhaa won the Tata Steel Masters chess tournament in the Netherlands on February 2, 2025, defeating D Gukesh 2-1 in a thrilling tie-breaker.

75. ISRO unveiled its new FEAST 2025 software at the 8th National Finite Element Developers’/FE at IIT Hyderabad.

76. ISRO and IIT Madras have developed the IRIS (Indigenous RISC-V Microprocessor for Space Applications), an indigenous semiconductor chip.

77. Conclave won Best Film, Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Editing, and Outstanding British Film , BAAFTA Awards.

78. Rajasthan Deputy Chief Minister and Finance Minister Diya Kumari presented the state’s first-ever Green Budget for 2025- 26, with a total outlay of ₹5.37 lakh crore.

79. Delhi  Mohalla  clinics would be renamed as Ayushman Arogya Mandir.

80. The Jharkhand government has implemented a one-year prohibition on the sale, production, storage, and distribution of gutkha and pan masala throughout the state. 

81. Assam government notified Chirang-Ripu Elephant Reserve as the 8th national park in the state.

82. Karnataka — Focussing on rural road development, the State Budget has proposed to roll out 'Pragati Path' scheme with external assistance.

83. The OPEC+ Organisation was soon joined by Brazil as an Observer member, marking an important development in the global oil market. Brazil happens to be one of the top oil producers and plays an important role in energy exports.

84. India’s first wildlife bio-bank at Padmaja Naidu Himalayan Zoological Park (Darjeeling Zoo) is fully operational. 

- Biobank: The biobank (frozen zoo) preserves genetic material from animals for conservation and research.  
 


 



                                                      ********************** March 2025 *************

1. The Solar Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (SUIT) instrument onboard Aditya-L1 observed an X6.3-class solar flare recently, one of the most intense categories of solar eruptions. 
- SUIT is one of the remote sensing payloads on board the Aditya-L1, the first dedicated solar mission of the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), that was launched on September 02, 2023.
- A solar flare is a sudden and intense burst of solar energy from the Solar atmosphere. 
- Flares are our solar system’s largest explosive events. The phenomenon is caused by the Sun's magnetic field. 


2. Recently, the Defence Research & Development Organisation (DRDO) and Indian Navy carried out successful flight-trials of the first-of-its-kind Naval Anti-Ship missile (NASM-SR) from Integrated Test Range (ITR), Chandipur.

3. Biodiversity leak is a term used to describe a phenomenon where environmental conservation efforts in one area or country result in the unintended transfer of environmental harm or biodiversity loss to another area or country. 

- This is similar to the concept of carbon leakage in climate policy, where strict emissions regulations in one country push polluting activities to countries with weaker regulations.

4. Recently, Amazon unveiled a prototype of its first-ever in-house quantum computing chip called Ocelot.

- It is a new quantum computing chip with a nine-qubit chip that has been internally fabricated by Amazon.

- It is developed by the team at the Amazon Web Services Center for Quantum Computing at the California Institute of Technology.

5. Markets regulator Sebi recently launched a centralized database portal for corporate bonds, Bond Central.

6.Auroville celebrated its 57th birth anniversary with bonfire meditation at the Amphitheatre, Matrimandir, recently.

- Auroville is an experimental international township in South India (in Tamil Nadu, near Pondicherry) where thousands of residents from over 60 countries are exploring alternative ways of living, working, and being together peacefully.

- It was founded by Mirra Alfassa, known as the ‘Mother’, the spiritual collaborator of Sri Aurobindo, on the 28th of February, 1968, as an international cultural township.

7. Exercise Desert Hunt 2025 was conducted at Air Force Station Jodhpur from 24 to 28 February 2025.

- It is an integrated Tri-Service Special Forces exercise conducted by the Indian Air Force.

8. Olive redley turtle  are the smallest and most abundant of all sea turtles found in the world.
 
- found on coast of odisha. Odisha’s Gahirmatha Marine Sanctuary is known as the world’s largest rookery (a colony of breeding animals) of sea turtles.

9. Bhagwan Mahavir Wildlife Sanctuary Nestled in the Western Ghats, it is located on the eastern border of the state of Goa, near the village of Mollem.

- Originally known as the Mollem Game Sanctuary, it was declared a wildlife sanctuary in 1969 and then renamed the Bhagwan Mahavir Wildlife Sanctuary.

- The sanctuary includes the Mollem National Park.

- Green turtle -lakshwadweep , leatherback turtle - Andaman and Nicobar
10. Recently, the Archaeological Survey of India’s epigraphical survey in Sri Lankamalleswara Wildlife Sanctuary in Kadapa district has made major findings of three rock shelters and rock paintings along with 30 inscriptions. 

- It is located in the Kadapa district of Andhra Pradesh. The Sanctuary forms the catchment for river Pennar.

11. Amidst the ongoing heavy rain and snowfall in the higher reaches of Himachal Pradesh, the Bhakra Beas Management Board (BBMB) opened the spillway gates of the Pandoh Dam recently as a precautionary measure.

- It is an embankment Dam that lies in the Mandi district of Himachal Pradesh.
- Constructed on Beas River, the primary purpose of Pandoh Dam is hydroelectric power generation. 

12. A US Marine Corps (USMC) F-35B Lightning II recently flew its first-ever test missions with the Meteor air-to-air missile.

13. The Geological Survey of India (GSI) is under the Ministry of Mines, Government of India

14. At least four people died after cyclone Garance struck the French overseas territory of La Reunion recently.
- It is a French island in the Western Indian Ocean.

15. Firefly Aerospace's Blue Ghost lunar lander has successfully touched down on the Moon's Mare Crisium region after a nerve-wracking powered descent.

16. Forest officials recently restricted entry along a 5-km stretch from Gokharakuda to Bateswar near the Rushikulya river mouth in Ganjam district to protect Olive Ridley turtle eggs. 

- It is one of Odisha's prominent rivers, flowing primarily through the districts of Kandhamal, Ganjam, and Boudh. 

17. The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) recently sought an action taken report from the district magistrate-cum-collector of Keonjhar on alleged human rights violations of the Juanga tribe, a PVTG in the district.

- Juang is one of the 13 particularly vulnerable tribal groups (PVTGs) of the total 62 tribes found in Odisha.

18. Recently, the central government launched the Aadhaar Good Governance portal to streamline the approval process for Aadhaar authentication requests.

19. Kawal Tiger Reserve is located in the Telangana State along the banks of river Godavari, forming part of the Deccan peninsula-central highlands.

- The government of India declared Kawal Wildlife Sanctuary a Tiger Reserve in 2012.

20. Two new species of jumping spiders discovered in Western Ghats

- First time the genus Epidelaxia has been recorded from the country. Discovered from 'Shendurney Wildlife Sanctuary' in Kollam. Genus was previously considered endemic to Sri Lanka.

21. Gujarat has emerged as the national leader in mangrove afforestation, covering 19,020 hectares in just two years under the Centre’s ‘MISHTI’ scheme.

- The Mangrove Initiative for Shoreline Habitats & Tangible Incomes (MISHTI) scheme is a government-led initiative aimed at increasing the mangrove cover along the coastline and on salt pan lands. 

- “MISHTI” comes after India joined the ‘Mangrove Alliance for Climate’ launched during the 27th Conference of Parties (COP27) to the UNFCCC held in Egypt in November 2022.  It was launched on 5th June, 2023 on the occasion of World Environment Day.

22. PM Narendra Modi received ‘Honorary Order of Freedom of Barbados’ Award from  Barbados.

23. India's latest and most advanced air-to-air missile, the Astra MK-III, has now been officially renamed Gandiva.          //defense

24. Tropicl cyclone Alfred in bribane islands, Australia.

25. FIFA bans Pakistan, Russia, Congo from 2026 World Cup.

26. PM modi inaugurated the Vantara Animal rescue center  at Jamnagar, Gujarat.

27. U.K. announces new $2 billion deal to fund air-defence missiles for Ukraine.

28. The Chairman of the World Spice Organisation (WSO) recently stated that India holds a meager 0.7% share in the global seasoning market, valued at $14 billion in 2024, compared to China’s 12% and the U.S.A.’s 11%.

- It is a not-for-profit organisation established in 2011 in Kochi, Kerala, the spice capital of India.

29.* Recently, Telangana's Mudumal Megalithic Menhirs were added to India’s tentative UNESCO World Heritage list, highlighting their historical and archaeological significance.

- Menhirs are large upright standing stones, often part of megalithic burial or ritual sites.

- Found across Europe, Africa, and Asia, they are most numerous in Western Europe.

- The most famous alignment is the Carnac Stones in France, with 2,935 menhirs.

- Menhir alignments coincide with solar events such as: equinox and solistice.

- Telangana currently has only one UNESCO World Heritage Site—Ramappa Temple, inscribed in 2021.

- Added to the UNESCO Tentative List in 2025, along with:
1. Kanger Valley National Park (Chhattisgarh).
2. Ashokan Edict Sites (Multiple States).
3. Chausath Yogini Temples (Madhya Pradesh & Odisha).
4. Gupta Temples (Multiple States).
5. Palace-Fortresses of the Bundelas (Madhya Pradesh & Uttar Pradesh).

- India now has 62 sites on its Tentative UNESCO List, a mandatory step before full inscription.

30. The Japanese government recently announced plans to consider deploying long-range missiles on the southwestern island of Kyushu.

- It is the southernmost and third largest of the four main islands of Japan.

- It is bordered by the East China Sea to the west and the Pacific Ocean to the east.

- Highest Peak: Mount Kuju (1,794 m) 

- Kyushu Island is not a coral island.

31.  first honey harvest was recently done near the Phansad Wildlife Sanctuary in the scenic coastal Raigad district adjoining the financial capital of Mumbai.

32. The Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister announced the installation of a 58-ft statue of Potti Sriramulu in Amaravati, commemorating his 58-day hunger strike for the formation of Andhra State.

- Participated in Salt Satyagraha (1930) and was imprisoned for his role. Took part in the Quit India Movement (1942) against British rule.

- A staunch follower of Mahatma Gandhi, he joined the Gandhi Ashram in Komaravolu, established by Yerneni Subrahmanyam.

33. Recently, the U.S. launched airstrikes on Houthi-controlled areas in Yemen, targeting Houthi bases, missile defenses, and leaders.

34. The Tunga and Bhadra rivers originate in the Western Ghats of India, specifically in the Chikmagalur district of Karnataka.

35. India and New Zealand recently launched negotiations for a comprehensive and mutually beneficial Free Trade Agreement (FTA), aiming to strengthen economic ties and enhance market access.

- Free Trade Agreement (FTA): Eliminates/reduces tariffs between member countries but retains independent external tariff policies for non-members.

36. Delhi Police has formed district-wise dedicated anti-eve-teasing squads (Shistachar squads) across the national capital to check incidents of harassment and ensure the safety of women in public spaces.

- Inspired by Uttar Pradesh’s Anti-Romeo Squads, it adopts a multi-faceted approach involving prevention, intervention, and victim assistance.

37. The Reserve Bank of India was recently selected for the UK's Digital Transformation Award 2025 for its tech innovations Sarthi and Pravaah systems.

- The Sarthi system, named after the Hindi word for ‘charioteer’, was launched in January 2023 to digitise all of RBI’s internal workflows. 

- It enables employees to securely store and share documents, improving record management and enhancing data analysis through reports and dashboards.

- Building upon the foundation of Sarthi, the Pravaah system, meaning ‘smooth flow’ in Hindi, was introduced in May 2024.

- This platform allows external users to submit regulatory applications digitally, seamlessly integrating with the Sarthi database for processing within RBI’s offices. 

- What is the Daksh initiative by the RBI?

Ans. It is a centralized, web-based, end-to-end workflow automation platform launched by the RBI to improve supervisory processes for banks, NBFCs, and other regulated entities.

38. Kanger Valley National Park is located in Jagdalpur in the Bastar district of Chhattisgarh state.

- Kanger River flows thorugh it, is a tributary of the Kolab River, which ultimately joins the Godavari River.

39. The Bar Council of India (BCI) recently issued a strict warning against 'unethical' legal advertising and misleading social media promotions leading to professional misconduct by advocates. 

- It is a statutory body created by Parliament to regulate and represent the Indian bar.

- It conducts the All India Bar Examination (AIBE) to grant a 'Certificate of Practice' to advocates practising law in India.

- The Bar Council of India consists of 18 Members, including attorney general and solicito general. 

40. Mount Fuji, also called Fuji-san, is Japan's tallest mountain, with a height of 3,776 meters.

- Mount Fuji is located on Honshu Island in Japan, approximately 100 km southwest of Tokyo.

- Mount Fuji is one of Japan's "Three Holy Mountains" along with Mount Tate and Mount Haku. 

41.The Betwa River, historically known as 'Vetravati', is significant in central and northern India, serving as a tributary of the Yamuna River.

- Originatig in MP, It flows through MP and UP  and empties into the Yamuna River just east of Hamirpur after a 380-mile (610-km) course.

42. Union Minister Nirmala Sitharaman recently launched a dedicated mobile application for the Prime Minister f Scheme and urged more companies to join the programme.

- It aims to provide young individuals aged 21-24 years from low-income households with 12-month internship opportunities in the country’s top 500 companies. 

- The PM internship is paid, offering a monthly stipend of ₹5,000 plus a one-time financial assistance of ₹6,000.

- Students from IITs, IIMs, National Law Universities, and individuals with professional degrees like CA, MBA, MBBS, etc., are excluded to promote inclusivity for underrepresented groups.

43. The Government of India is drafting a National Wildlife Health Policy (NWHP) to strengthen wildlife disease surveillance, research, and diagnostics.

- The Central Zoo Authority (CZA) initiated this program to enhance wildlife health and manage zoonotic diseases.

- Established in 1992 under the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEF&CC).

- Statutory body under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.

- National Referral Centre for Wildlife (NRC-W): It was recently inaugurated in Junagadh, Gujarat, and will serve as a key hub for wildlife health management.

- Functions as India’s first wildlife disease diagnostic and research centre.

44. The US President invoked the Alien Enemies Act (1798) for the first time since World War II to deport suspected members of the Venezuelan gang Tren de Aragua (TdA).

- Alien Enemies Act? Enacted in 1798 to combat spying and sabotage during tensions with France.

45. The Prime Minister recently welcomed New Zealand’s participation in the Indo-Pacific Ocean Initiative, highlighting both nations’ shared interest in maintaining peace and stability in the region.

- IPOI was launched by India in November 2019 at the ASEAN-led East Asia Summit (EAS) in Bangkok. 

46. Ana Sagar Lake , an artificial lake situated in Ajmer, Rajasthan.

- It was built by raising a dam across the Luni or Lavanavari River. 

- The lake was built by Arnoraja Chauhan, the grandfather of Prithviraj Chauhan, in 1135 - 1150 AD and was named after him.

47. Audible Enclaves are small pockets of sound that are not disturbed by surrounding noise.

- They allow specific individuals to hear a sound privately, even in crowded environments.

- The technology is based on sound wave manipulation, ensuring that only intended listeners can hear the transmitted sound.

48. Zomi tribe , Hmar tribe - They live in the northeastern states of Manipur, Assam, Mizoram, Megalaya, and Tripura. 

49. The Lok Sabha Secretariat and the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to develop the Sansad Bhashini initiative recently.


50. The India-Bangladesh naval exercise 'Bongosagar 2025' and a 'Coordinated Patrol (CORPAT)' took place in the Bay of Bengal recently. // defense

- It is a bilateral naval exercise between India and Bangladesh, started in year 2019.
- The exercise saw participation of INS Ranvir from the Indian Navy and BNS Abu Ubaidah from Bangladesh Navy.

51. India is home to about 12 Neglected Tropical Disease.

52. The Sagreshwar wildlife sanctuary, located in the Sangli district, has 536 sambars and 295 cheetals (spotted deer), making the sanctuary one of the highest in deer population, especially among manmade wildlife sanctuaries. 

- india's first manmade wildlife sanctuary.

53. APAAR stands for Automated Permanent Academic Account Registry.

- It is part of the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 to streamline student records.

- The initiative is based on the 'One Nation, One Student ID' concept.

54. Trade Ministry Recommends 12% Duty on Steel Imports Amid ‘Trade Diversion’ Concerns

* Directorate General of Trade Remedies (DGTR)

- Established: May 17, 2018 (formerly Directorate General of Anti-Dumping and Allied Duties).

- Nodal Ministry: Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce and Industry.

- Purpose: Acts as India’s anti-dumping watchdog, ensuring a level playing field for domestic industries against unfair trade practices like dumping, subsidization, and import surges.

55. Holocene Epoch :It is the current period of geologic time.

56. Kirsty Coventry Becomes First Woman and African President of the International Olympic Committee (IOC)

- IOC Established in 1894 by Pierre de Coubertin to revive the ancient Greek Olympics.

- IOC Headquarters: Lausanne, Switzerland.

57. What is a Spoofing Attack? 

- A “spoofing attack” is a broad category of cyberattack where fake data is disguised as originating from a trusted source to deceive systems or users.
 
- Kinds of spoofing include GPS Spoofing, IP spoofing—often used to avoid detection while performing Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)—as well as SMS spoofing and caller ID spoofing, where messages or calls appear to be from another number or caller ID.


58. The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) has criticised the Union Ministry of Tourism for the poor implementation of the Swadesh Darshan Scheme.

59. Swadesh Darshan Scheme

- Launched:2015 by the Ministry of Tourism.

- Objective: To develop sustainable and responsible tourism destinations in India by creating thematic tourist circuits.

- Funding:100% centrally funded scheme.

- Implementation: The Ministry of Tourism provides financial assistance to State Governments, UT Administrations, and Central Agencies.

- Operation & Maintenance (O&M) is the responsibility of the respective State/UT government.

60. The Centre for Development of Telematics (C-DoT) recently launched the ‘Samarth’ incubation programme .

- Objective: To support startups in the areas of telecom software, cybersecurity, 5G and 6G technologies, artificial intelligence (AI), Internet of Things (IoT) applications, and quantum technologies.

61. Exercise Khanjar -12 2025 , bilateral army exercise between india and kyrgystan was held at Tokmok ,kyrgystan.

62. Exercise Dharma Guardian 2025 was held at Mount Fuji Japan , army exercise between india and Japan.

63. Bihar Reiterates Demand for Special Category Status Before the 16th Finance Commission

* WHat is Special Category Status (SCS)?

- Special Category Status (SCS) is a classification given to states to provide them with additional central assistance due to economic and geographic disadvantages.

- Introduced in 1969 based on the 'Gadgil Formula' , recommended by the 5th Finance Commission (Mahavir Tyagi).

- Initially granted to Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, and Nagaland.

- Currently, 11 states have SCS:

- Northeast states: Assam, Nagaland, Manipur, Meghalaya, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, and Sikkim.

- Hilly states: Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand.

- Telangana (Granted due to bifurcation from Andhra Pradesh).

- States demanding SCS: Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Odisha.

* Criteria for SCS (Based on Gadgil Formula)

 A state must have:

- Hilly and difficult terrain.
- Low population density and/or a significant tribal population.
- Strategic location along international borders.
- Economic and infrastructural backwardness.
- Non-viable state finances.

* Benefits of Special Category Status (SCS)

- Higher Central Assistance: 90% of funds as grants and 10% as loans for Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS).

- Non-SCS states get only 30% grants and 70% loans.

- Special plan assistance: Funding for projects of special importance.

- Non-lapsable funds: Unspent funds do not lapse at the end of the financial year.

- Tax concessions: Special tax incentives (though many have been subsumed under GST).


64. The 14th ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-Plus (ADMM-Plus) Experts' Working Group on Counter-Terrorism (EWG on CT) was recently held in New Delhi.

- India and Malaysia have assumed co-chairmanship of EWG on CT (2024-2027).

65. Elon Musk-Owned X Challenges Government Over IT Act Provisions

- An online platform (Sahyog Portal) developed for automating the issuance of content removal notices to intermediaries under the Information Technology (IT) Act, 2000.

- Ministry involved: Managed by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA).

66. The $23 billion Production-Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme, launched in 2020 to boost domestic manufacturing and reduce dependence on China, is set to lapse as many firms failed to meet production targets.

- 94% of the $620 million incentives disbursed (April-Oct 2024) went to pharmaceuticals and mobile phones, highlighting uneven sectoral success.

67. Lok Sabha Approves ₹50 Lakh Crore in Demands for Grants for 2025-26.

68. Tansa Wildlife Sanctuary is located in the Thane District of Maharashtra, 90 km northeast of Mumbai in the foothills of the Western Ghats.

- It has two rivers, the Tansa and Vaitarna, and the sanctuary gets its name from the former.

69. The Indian Navy recently participated in the Sea Dragon 2025 exercise.  // defense

- It is a multinational anti-submarine warfare (ASW) drill conducted annually to strengthen maritime security and cooperation among allied nations in the Indo-Pacific region.

- Hosted by the United States Navy’s 7th Fleet at Andersen Air Force Base, Guam. Primary focus - Anti-submarine warfare (ASW) drills

70. The Gambhir River, also known as the Utangan River, is a significant watercourse in Rajasthan.

- It is a seasonal river and flows only in the rainy season.

- The Gambhir River Basin is located in the northeastern portion of Rajasthan. 

- It supplies water to the Keoladeo National Park, a UNESCO World Heritage Site known for its bird sanctuary. 

71. Exercise Varuna 2025, the 23rd edition of the India-France bilateral naval exercise, took place in the Arabian Sea from March 19–22, 2025. // defense

- Bilateral Naval Exercise between India and France, first initiated in 1993.

- INS Vikrant (India) and Charles de Gaulle (France) participated in joint carrier battle group operations.

- FRINJEX: Army Joint Exercise.

- GARUDA: Air Force Exercise.


72. India has developed its first indigenous MRI machine, set to be installed at AIIMS Delhi.

73.* The Indian Navy will participate in the maiden multilateral maritime exercise titled ‘Africa-India Key Maritime Engagement’ (AIKEYME), co-hosted with Tanzania in April 2025, to enhance maritime security and cooperation with African nations.  // defense

- The first edition will take place in April 2025 in Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania.

- Comoros, Djibouti Eritrea, Kenya, Madagascar, Mauritius, Mozambique, Seychelles, South Africa, India and Tanzania (co-hosts)

74. In a recent discovery, researchers recently identified a new species of freshwater algae named ‘Sheathia rosemalayensis’, in Rosemala, located in Kollam district, Kerala.

75. ‘Tavasya’, the last of the four Krivak-class stealth frigates, was launched at Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) on March 22, 2025.

- It is the second ship under construction at GSL under a technology transfer agreement with Russia.

76. Nano DAP is a liquid nano-fertilizer developed to improve nutrient absorption and enhance plant growth.

- manufactured by IFFCO , 8% nitrogen 16% phosphorous , in liquid form 

77.  Sukhna Wildlife Sanctuary  is a protected area located in Chandigarh, near the famous Sukhna Lake at the foothills of the Shivalik range.

78. India has launched Operation Brahma, sending humanitarian aid and relief supplies to the affected region.

- A 7.7 magnitude earthquake hit Mandalay, Myanmar.

- Capital: Nay Pyi Taw (declared in 2006, replacing Yangon)


79. The Indian Air Force (IAF) is set to participate in Exercise INIOCHOS-25, a major multi-national air exercise hosted by the Hellenic Air Force in Greece from March 31 to April 11, 2025. This prestigious event will involve 15 nations and provide a platform for combat interoperability.

80. Eminent Hindi writer Vinod Kumar Shukla has been named the recipient of the 59th Jnanpith Award, India’s highest literary honour.

- jnanpith award establshed in 1961.

                  ********************** April 2025 *************

1. 4th edition of Exercise 'Tiger Triumph' held at vishakapatnam , army ,navy and us army participated in it.    // defense

2. A groundbreaking archaeological find in Lefkada, Greece, has unveiled the first-ever ancient Greek theater discovered in the Ionian Islands. 

- The Ionian Islands are a group of islands that are located off the western coast of Greece in the eastern part of the Ionian Sea.

- These islands are also often referred to as “Heptanese” or “Seven Islands.”

- Mount Ainos, which rises to an elevation of 1,628 m, is the highest point on Ionian Island.

3.  Recently, the Geographical Indications Registry Chennai has granted a new logo for the Kashmir hand-knotted carpet in order to preserve the exclusivity of the famed Kashmir carpets.

- The origin of hand knotted carpets locally known as "Kal baffi" dates back to 15th century after which it progressively attained the high degree of perfection.

4. Recently, the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has mandated stock exchanges to empanel algorithmic trading providers and has also defined rules for using application programming interfaces (APIs).

5. Researchers recently discovered a strange new state of matter in the dynamics of currents flowing through layers of graphene.

* Graphene
- It is an allotrope of carbon, along with diamond and graphite.
 
- It is a 2-dimensional material consisting of a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb structure.  

- The stacked form of graphene is graphite. Graphene was first isolated in 2004. Excellent conductor of electricity.

- Strength: It is 200 times stronger than steel but six times lighter. 

- Thickness: Graphene is the world's thinnest material – it is only one atom thick, one million times thinner than a human hair.

- Transparency: It is almost perfectly transparent since it only absorbs 2% of light.

- It is impermeable to gases, even those as light as hydrogen or helium.

6. Satkosia Tiger Reserve : It is located in the heartland of Odisha and spread over four districts, viz. Angul, Cuttack, Boudh, and Nayagarh.

- It comprises two adjoining sanctuaries, namely Baisipalli Sanctuary and Satkosia Gorge Sanctuary.

7. PM Narendra Modi will take part in Navkar Mahamantra Divas on April 9, 2025, at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi.

- Organized by the Jain International Trade Organization (JITO)

8. PM Narendra Modi has been awarded 'Mitra Vibhushana', srilanka's highest honour to a foreigner by Sri Lankan President Anura Kumar Dissanayake.

9. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology recently launched the Digital Threat Report 2024 for the Banking, Financial Services, and insurance (BFSI) sector. 

- SISA, CERT-In, and CSIRT collaborated to create the Digital Threat Report 2024?

10. President of India, Smt. Droupadi Murmu, visited Lisbon, Portugal, where she was honored with the ‘City Key of Honour’. 


11. Uttarakhand CM Pushkar Singh Dhami launched the Bhagirath app as part of the Jal Sanrakshan Abhiyan 2025, aiming to engage citizens in identifying and reporting endangered water sources. 

12. The Supreme Courts of India and Nepal signed a MoU for judicial cooperation, an occasion which Chief Justice of India Sanjiv Khanna termed as the lighting of a new torch in the relationship between the two countries’ judiciaries.

13.The Government of India has approved a 9.5% hike in material cost under the PM-POSHAN scheme, resulting in an additional central expenditure of ₹954 crore for the financial year 2025–26, effective from May 1, 2025.

14. Sunbird is a nuclear fusion-powered rocket being developed by Pulsar Fusion, a British startup, to revolutionize interplanetary travel.

15. The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has recently introduced a new category of industries called the ‘Blue Category’, which falls under Essential Environmental Services (EES).

- ‘Blue Washing’ refers to the practice of portraying polluting industries as environmentally friendly by categorizing them under less polluting or cleaner industry labels.

16. India unveiled the BM-04 missile at a defense exhibition in Hyderabad last month. This next-generation short-range ballistic missile (SRBM) reflects India’s focus on enhancing its conventional counterforce capabilities.   // defense

17. The Arctic biome comprises tundra ecosystems with permafrost, low biodiversity, and extreme cold. It spans northern latitudes (66.5°N+) and hosts species like polar bears, Arctic foxes, and migratory birds.

18. Recently, the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS), chaired by the Prime Minister, approved a ₹63,000-crore deal for procuring 26 Rafale-M fighter jets from France for the Indian Navy.

- The deal includes 22 single-seater Rafale-M jets for carrier operations and 4 twin-seater trainer variants, which are non-carrier compatible.

- The jets are meant to operate from INS Vikramaditya and INS Vikrant, India’s two operational aircraft carriers.

19. Dozens of mini-earthquakes have rattled Alaska's 'Mount Spurr' recently, sparking fears among scientists that the towering 11,000-foot volcano may be on the verge of a major eruption.

20. "Gaurav" is a 1,000-kg class glide bomb designed and developed indigenously by the DRDO.

- DRDO successfully conducted the Release Trials of Long-Range Glide Bomb (LRGB) ‘Gaurav’ recently.  // defense

21. The Mahadayi River, also called Mandovi or Mhadei, is a rain-fed river that is shared between Karnataka and Goa for their water needs. 

- It originates from Bhimgad Wildlife Sanctuary in the Western Ghats in Karnataka.

22. The Union Cabinet recently approved the ‘Modernisation of Command Area Development and Water Management (M-CADWM)’ as a sub-scheme of the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY).

- This initiative, with an initial outlay of ₹1,600 crore, is set to run from 2025-2026 and is designed to significantly enhance the irrigation infrastructure in India.

23. The Railway Minister recently announced that 104 of the 1,300 stations being redeveloped under the Amrit Bharat scheme are complete.

- It aims to enhance and modernize railway stations throughout the Indian Railways network. 

24. The IIP(index of industrial production) is published by the Central Statistics Office(CSO), which is part of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI).

- Industrial output grew by only 2.9% in February 2025, marking the slowest growth in six months, well below the market expectation of 4%.

25. Recently, the Beijing India Report 2024, submitted on the 30th anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action (1995), highlighted progress on gender equality and exposed gaps in addressing the gender-climate nexus.

- The Declaration emphasized women’s rights as human rights and promoted legal and social reforms to achieve gender equality.

- It was a landmark global framework adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women by the United Nations.

26. The recent La Niña event in the tropical Pacific Ocean has officially ended, with the climate system now transitioning to ENSO-neutral conditions as confirmed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

* El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO): ENSO is a significant climate phenomenon that involves changes in sea-surface temperatures (SST) in the central and eastern tropical Pacific Ocean. 
 
- It affects various global weather patterns, including wind behavior, atmospheric pressure, and rainfall distribution.

- El Niño: Warmer-than-usual sea surface temperatures associated with unusual global warming patterns.

- El Niño weakens monsoon rains (e.g., 2023 saw 94% of average rainfall), while La Niña enhances it (2022: 106%).

- El Niño triggers droughts in Australia/SE Asia but floods in South America. The 2023-24 El Niño reduced India’s wheat output by 5%.

- La Niña: Cooler-than-usual sea surface temperatures often linked with colder atmospheric patterns and stronger trade winds.

- ENSO-Neutral: Neither El Niño nor La Niña dominates the climate system, making forecasts less certain but often acting as a transitional phase between the two extreme conditions.

27. Neutrinos are electrically neutral subatomic particles that are produced in processes like radioactive decay and nuclear reactions, including those occurring in the sun and stars.

- KATRIN experiment : KATRIN stands for Karlsruhe Tritium Neutrino experiment, and it is located in Karlsruhe, Germany.
- Its primary aim is to precisely measure the mass of the electron antineutrino, a type of neutrino produced in beta decay.

* NISTHA Scheme:

- The National Initiative for School Heads and Teachers Holistic Advancement (NISHTHA) is a skill and knowledge improving program for teachers and principals in India. 

- The program was launched in 2019 by the Ministry of Education. 

- The goal is to improve the quality of elementary school education and provide the teachers with the necessary training in child development, pedagogy and ICT. 

- The scheme will be implemented in all states and UTs all over India.

- 18 activity-based training modules, fostering hands-on learning.

* The INSPIRE – MANAK (Million Minds Augmenting National Aspiration and Knowledge) is one of the flagship schemes of the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Govt. of India.

- It is for nurturing ideas and innovations of school students and motivates them to pursue science and a career in research.

- It is jointly implemented by DST and the National Innovation Foundation (NIF) – India.

 What is the National Innovation Foundation? It was set up in March 2000 with the assistance of the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India.

28. Recently, UNESCO has added manuscripts of the Bhagavad Gita and Bharata’s Natyashastra to the Memory of the World (MoW) Register in 2025.

 What is the Memory of the World (MoW) Programme?

- The MoW Programme was launched by UNESCO in 1992 with the goal of preserving global documentary heritage 

- It aims to safeguard rare documents, including manuscripts, oral traditions, audio-visual content, and archive materials, of global and universal value.

- The MoW Register serves as a global compendium of such heritage, and is updated biennially (every two years).

- As of 2025, the Register contains 570 entries, including: The Mahavamsa (Sri Lanka’s ancient chronicle), Shaiva Siddhanta manuscripts (India),
Auschwitz trial recordings (Germany), And the March 7, 1971 speech of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman (Bangladesh). 

* India’s Contributions to the MoW Register

- India has made 13 contributions, including two joint submissions: Rig Veda (added in 2005), Works of Abhinavagupta, the Shaivite philosopher (added in 2023),
- Archives of the Non-Aligned Movement’s first summit in Belgrade, 1961 (joint submission), Dutch East India Company archives (joint submission).

- In 2025, two new Indian manuscripts were added, both preserved at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune: Natyashastra by Bharata Muni
Bhagavad Gita, attributed to Vyasa

29. India has set an ambitious defense production goal of ₹3 lakh crore by 2029, with current production projected to cross ₹1.60 lakh crore. Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, speaking at the Defense Conclave 2025, emphasized the country’s mission to become self-reliant, reduce import dependency.


30. The Bullseye Galaxy (LEDA 1313424) was recently discovered by an international team of researchers using the Hubble Space Telescope and W.M. Keck Observatory.

- The Bullseye Galaxy (LEDA 1313424) is a collisional ring galaxy (CRG) located approximately 534 million light-years away in the constellation Pisces..

31. Bengal swimmer Sayoni Das successfully managed to cross the Strait of Gibraltar as reportedly the first Asian woman recently.

32. Alamosaurus is one of the largest dinosaurs known to have existed.

33. Nepal observed its first-ever ‘National Yak Day’ on April 20, 2025, to honor the cultural, ecological, and economic value of the yak in the Himalayan region.

34. The Sapsan (or Hrim-2, Grom-2) is a Ukrainian tactical ballistic missile system.   // defense

- It is designed to combine the features of a tactical missile system and a multiple rocket launcher.

35. Recently, the Union Agriculture Minister led the Indian delegation to the 15th BRICS Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting in Brasília, Brazil. 

36. Earth Day takes place every year on 22 April and is one of the biggest environmental protest movements on the planet.

- The official theme for Earth Day 2025 is “OUR POWER, OUR PLANET”.

37. Indian Navy ships INS Chennai ( MDL) and INS Kesari (GRSE) successfully carried out maneuvering exercises and Visit, Board, Search & Seizure (VBSS) drills during the sea phase of Africa India Key Maritime Engagement (AIKEYME) 2025.

38. Recently, Scientists have developed a water-based, non-toxic recycling method for PSCs, avoiding the need for hazardous solvents.

- The general chemical formula of a perovskite compound is ABX₃, where 'A' and 'B' are cations, and 'X' is an anion.

39. Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons : ASAT weapons are specialized technologies designed to disable, destroy, or interfere with satellites in orbit for strategic or defensive purposes.
- As of now, 4 countries — the United States, Russia, China, and India — have demonstrated operational ASAT capabilities through tests.

- India’s ASAT Test (Mission Shakti) was conducted in March 2019

40. Recently, the Indian Air Force (IAF) has joined the prestigious Exercise Desert Flag-10 (21 April to 08 May 2025), a multinational air combat exercise being hosted by the United Arab Emirates (UAE) at Al Dhafra Air Base.   // defense

41. Project Varsha : A classified naval infrastructure project launched by the Indian Navy to build INS Varsha, a state-of-the-art nuclear submarine base.

- Located near Rambilli, about 50 km south of Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh.     // defense


*****************Budget 2025 *************************

- The total receipts other than borrowings = ₹ 34.96 lakh crore 

- Total expenditure are estimated =  ₹ 50.65 lakh crore .

- The net tax receipts are estimated at ₹ 28.37 lakh crore.

- The fiscal deficit is estimated to be 4.4 per cent of GDP.

- The gross market borrowings are estimated at ₹ 14.82 lakh crore.

- Capex Expenditure of ₹11.21 lakh crore (3.1% of GDP) earmarked in FY2025-26.

1. Agriculture as the 1st Engine of Development

- Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana – Developing Agri Districts Programme:  covering 100 districts with low productivity, moderate crop intensity
and below-average credit parameters, to benefit 1.7 crore farmers.

- Building Rural Prosperity and Resilience:  to address under-employment in agriculture through skilling, investment, technology, and invigorating the rural economy.

- Aatmanirbharta in Pulses: Government to launch a 6-year “Mission for Aatmanirbharta in Pulses” with focus on Tur, Urad and Masoor.

- NAFED and NCCF to procure these pulses from farmers during the next 4 years.
 
- Comprehensive Programme for Vegetables & Fruits

- Makhana Board in Bihar

- National Mission on High-Yielding Seeds

- Fisheries

- Mission for Cotton Productivity

- Enhanced Credit through KCC: The loan limit under the Modified Interest Subvention Scheme to be enhanced from ₹ 3 lakh to ₹ 5 lakh for loans taken through the KCC.

- Urea Plant in Assam: A plant with annual capacity of 12.7 lakh metric tons to be set up at Namrup, Assam.


* MSME’s as the 2nd Engine of Development

- Revision in classification criteria for MSMEs: The investment and turnover limits for classification of all MSMEs to be enhanced to 2.5 and 2 times respectively.

- Credit Cards for Micro Enterprises: Customized Credit Cards with ₹ 5 lakh limit for micro enterprises registered on Udyam portal, 10 lakh cards to be issued in the first year.

- Fund of Funds for Startups: A new Fund of Funds, with expanded scope and a fresh contribution of ₹ 10,000 crore to be set up.

- Scheme for First-time Entrepreneurs: A new scheme for 5 lakh women, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes first time entrepreneurs to provide term-loans upto ₹ 2 crore in the next 5 years announced.

- Focus Product Scheme for Footwear & Leather Sectors

- Measures for the Toy Sector

- Support for Food Processing: A National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management to be set up in Bihar.

- Manufacturing Mission – Furthering “Make in India”


* Investment as the 3rd Engine of Development

- Atal Tinkering Labs: 50,000 Atal Tinkering Labs to be set up in Government schools in next 5 years.

- Expansion of Capacity in IITs: Additional infrastructure tobe created in the 5 IITs started after 2014 to facilitate education for 6,500 more students.

- Centre of Excellence in AI for Education: A Centre of Excellence in Artificial Intelligence for education to be set up with a total outlay of ₹ 500 crore.

- PM SVANidhi: Scheme to be revamped with enhanced loans from banks, UPI linked credit cards with ₹ 30,000 limit, and capacity building support.

- Maritime Development Fund: A Maritime Development Fund with a corpus of ₹ 25,000 crore to be set up, with up to 49% contribution by the Government, and the
balance from ports and private sector.

- UDAN – Regional Connectivity Scheme: A modified UDAN Scheme

- Greenfield Airport in Bihar: Greenfield airports  will be developed at Rajgir in Nalanda district, Sonepur in Saran district and Bhagalpur.

- Western Koshi Canal Project in Mithilanchal: Financial support for the Western Koshi Canal ERM Project in Bihar.

- Mining Sector Reforms: A policy for recovery of critical minerals from tailings to be brought out.

- SWAMIH Fund 2: A fund of ₹ 15,000 crore aimed at expeditious completion of another 1 lakh dwelling units, with contribution from the Government, banks and
private investors announced.

- Tourism for employment-led growth: Top 50 tourist destination sites in the country to be developed in partnership with states through a challenge mode.

- R & D : ₹20,000 crore to be allocated to implement private sector driven Research, Development and Innovation.

- Deep Tech Fund of Funds: 10000 crore allocation.

- PM Research Fellowship: 10,000 fellowships for technological research in IITs and IISc with enhanced financial support.

- Gene Bank for Crops Germplasm: 2nd Gene Bank with 10 lakh germplasm lines to be set up for future food and nutritional security.

- Increases the Gender Budget allocation to 8.86% of the total budget, up from 6.8% in FY 2024-25.

- The allocation for women and girls has risen by 37.25% to ₹4.49 lakh crore.

* Exports as the 4th Engine of Development :

- Export Promotion Mission: , and Finance to be set up.

- BharatTradeNet

- National Framework for GCC


* Revenue of about ₹ 2600 crore in indirect taxes will be forgone due to removal of these taxes 

- Relief on import of Drugs/Medicines

- Support to Domestic Manufacturing and Value addition

- Critical Minerals: Cobalt powder and waste, the scrap of lithium-ion battery, Lead, Zinc and 12 more critical minerals fully exempted from Basic Custom Duty.

* SWAMIH Fund 2 : Objective: Address the housing needs of middle-income families

- 15,000 crore fund to complete stressed housing projects.

* UDAN – Regional Connectivity Scheme :  Modified scheme to connect 120 new destinations.









*****************Economic survey 2025 *************************

- India’s real GDP growth is estimated at 6.4 per cent in FY25

- The real GDP growth in FY26 is expected to grow between 6.3 and 6.8 per cent,

- Retail headline inflation has softened from 5.4 per cent in FY24 to 4.9 per cent in April –December 2024.

- The gross non-performing assets (GNPAs) of Scheduled Commercial Banks declined to a 12-year low of 2.6% of gross loans and advances at the end of September
2024.

- India’s pension sector experienced significant growth, with the total number of pension subscribers growing by 16 % (YoY) as of September 2024.

- The Union Government‘s capital expenditure on key infrastructure sectors has grown at a rate of 38.8 % from FY20 to FY24.

- Under railway connectivity, 2031 km of railway network was commissioned between April and November, 2024, and 17 new pairs of Vande Bharat trains were introduced
between April and October 2024.

- Under road network, 5853 km of National Highways was constructed in FY25 (April-Dec).

- India’s services export growth surged to 12.8 % during April–November FY25, up from 5.7 % in FY24.

- The industrial sector expected to grow by 6.2 %  in FY-25 (first advance estimates), driven by robust growth in electricity and construction.

- The government has been actively promoting Smart Manufacturing and Industry 4.0, supporting the establishment of SAMARTH Udyog centres.

- To provide equity funding to MSMEs with the potential to scale up, the government launched the Self-Reliant India Fund with a corpus of ₹50,000 crore.

- Gini coefficient , is declining. For rural areas it declined to 0.237 in 2023-24 from 0.266 in 2022-23, and for urban areas, it fell to 0.284 in 2023-24 from 0.314 in 2022-23.

- unemployment rate declining to 3.2 per cent in 2023-24 (July-June) from 6.0 per cent in 2017-18 (July-June).

- Global Inflation: Fell to 5.7% (2024) from 8.7% (2022).





/////////////// Static GK  RRB

1. Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) are often referred to as "paper gold".
2. population growth rate in india decline from 21.54% in 2001 to 17.64% in 2011
3.Japan parliament is known as Diet.
4. A foreign policy of India- IK Gujral , 
  'The Indian Struggle' - Subhash Chandra Bose,
 Wings of air - APJ Abdul kalam ,
 'Glimpses of world History' -Jawaharlal nehru , 'Hind Swaraj' - Mahatma Gandhi , 'WHy i am an atheist'- Bhagat Singh;
 'The Indian War of Independence' is an Indian nationalist history of the 1857 revolt by Vinayak Damodar Savarkar that was first published in 1909.
 - author of the book ‘From Plassey to Partition and After : A History of Modern India’ - Sekhar Bandyopadhyay



5. A hygrometer is the instrument used to measure humidity, or the amount of water vapor in the air.
6. Ernst Ruska, a German electrical engineer, invented the electron microscope in 1931. 
7. Kidney stones consist mostly of 'calcium oxalate'.
8. 'Cotopaxi' is one of the highest active volcanoes in the world, located in the Andes Mountains of Ecuador.
9. The difference between IST (Indian Standard Time) and GMT (Greenwich Mean Time) is 5 hours and 30 minutes. IST is GMT +5:30.
10. Jatin das died in jail due to hunger strike in Lahore jail
11  The Mahalanobis model was the economic development model that guided India's second five-year plan (1956-1961).
12 The Vijay Stambha, or Tower of Victory, is located in Chittor Fort in Chittorgarh, Rajasthan, India. The tower is a monument to the victory of the Rajput king Rana Kumbha of Mewar over the combined armies of Malwa and Gujarat in the Battle of Sarangpur.
13. One of the main objectives of the Fifth Five-Year Plan was to eradicate poverty and attain self-reliance. For this goal, the government under Indira Gandhi came up with the slogan 'Garibi Hatao'.
14. Misch metal(cerium , lanthanum , neodynium) is widely used in the manufacture of cigarette lighters.
15 Lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell, are formed in the bone marrow and thymus, which are called primary lymphoid organs:
16. Popular dance forms of Arunachal Pradesh-  Ponung Dance , Buiya Dance , Wancho Dance , Rikhampada Dance , Pasi Kongki Dance
                                     Chalo Dance ,Popir Dance, Lion and Peacock Dance ,Aji Lhamu Dance ,Rekham Pada Dance
17 The most abundant dissolved ions in the ocean are chloride and sodium
18 The Battle of Haifa was a decisive battle fought on 23 September 1918,, where the elements consisting mainly of Indian troops of the British Army engaged and defeated the forces of the Ottoman Empire and their German allies.
19 Molten salts are a common storage medium for high-temperature solar thermal energy because they can store thermal energy at temperatures ranging from 200°C to beyond 500°C. This process is known as molten salt energy storage (MSES) or molten-salt technology.
20 The first transgenic plant to be produced it Tobbaco. 
21 The International Development Association (IDA) is known as the "soft loan window" of the World Bank
22 NAFED is the apex body in cooperative sector and deals in procurement , distribution, export and import of selected agricultural commodities.
23 Mt Adams a stratovolcano is located in USA(Washington)
24 abu dhabi worlds richest city in terms of sovereign wealth fund.
25 K rammohan Naidu , civil aviation minister of india.
26 Concept of Single citizenship was borrowed from UK constitution.
27 rivers from north to south in himalaya- Shyok-Zaskar-Spiti-Satluj
28 Pulsars are Spinning neutron stars that are the remnants of massive stars that exploded as a supernova
29. Veritas(mission by nasa)- Venus , Juno - Jupiter
30 The most common fiber used to make bulletproof jackets is Kevlar, a synthetic fiber that is about five times stronger than steel: 
31 Tesla humanoid robot name is Optimus , it was launched in year 2022.
32 Seafloor spreading is the process that continually adds new crust to the Earth's surface: 
33 mRNA stands for messenger ribonucleic acid
34 The World Economic Forum (WEF) publishes the Global Gender Gap Index annually. The index was first released in 2006. 
34 The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) publishes the Global Innovation Index (GII) annually: 
35 The Lisbon Declaration is related to the ocean and space: 
36 Sikkim became the 22nd state of India on May 16, 1975 
37 Taxila university- Mahayana buddhist  , Vikramashila university - Vajrayana Buddhism
38  The port of Surat in India was called Babul Makka, which means "Gate of Mecca", during the Mughal period.
39 Ashta Pradhan was a council of ministers in the Maratha Empire
40 Bodhisattva Padmapani, mural painting by an unknown artist that is believed to date from the late 5th century at Ajanta caves.
41 Ghiyas ud din Balban introduced the Persian festival of Nowruz (or Navroz) to India.
42 The Nathpanthis, Siddhas, and Yogis made devotional religion popular in northern India.
43 Wood's Despatch of 1854 is considered the ‘Magna Carta’ of English Education in India.
--J.E.D. Bethune established the Bethune School to promote women’s education in India by receiving grants under the provisions.
44 Karnata or Karnat dynasty was established by Nanyadev in 1097 CE and was a Maithil dynasty.maithili language began to develop during his rule after the end of pala rule in region and disappearnace of buddhism.
45 The President of India has the power to determine the number of judges in a high court. As per Article 216 of the Indian Constitution, every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such other judges as the President may from time to time deem it necessary to appoint.
46 The President appoints judges to the High Court after consulting with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State, and the Chief Justice of the High Court. 
47 A Reserve Tranche Position (RTP) is the difference between a country's quota in the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the IMF's holdings of that country's currency. It's a member country's external reserve and is calculated as follows:

48 Atmiya sabha by Raja Ram mohan roy,The Tattwabodhini Sabha was a group founded by Debendranath Tagore in Kolkata on October 6, 1839. The Sabha's goal was to spread the knowledge of the Shastras and Vedantas, and to promote a rational and humanist form of Hinduism. 

49 Ambabai, a freedom fighter from Karnataka, was born in the erstwhile Mysore State, which is now part of Karnataka
50 Pangong Lake, also known as Pangong Tso, is the world's highest saltwater lake 
51 Koldihwa is one of the few Neolithic sites in Uttar Pradesh, along with Mahagara. Both sites are located on opposite banks of the Belan River. 
52 Paiyampalli is a village in the Tirupattur district of Tamil Nadu, India. It is known for its Neolithic and Megalithic period excavation site. 
53 Utnur is a Neolithic site in the Adilabad district of Telangana, India. It's known for its ash mounds, which are large piles of burnt earth and ash left behind by Neolithic people who lived in the area around 2000 BCE.
54 The Panchala Mahajanapada had two capitals: Kampilya in the south and Ahichchhatra in the north.

55 Borehole geophysics research laboratory is located in Maharastra.

56 Sarus crane is state bird of UP.
57 The first case of monkeypox in humans was in 1970 in Zaire, which is now the Democratic Republic of Congo. 
58 KABIL(Khanij videsh India Ltd) is a joint venture between between NALCO ,Hindustan copper Ltd, and Mineral Exploration and Consultancy Ltd.
59 Monazite is a mineral that contains rare earths and thorium. It's a phosphate mineral with the chemical formula (Ce, La, Th)PO4.
60 Allahabad Bank india's oldest joint stock bank.
61 Bhopal lake is largest artificial lake of asia.
62 Hemis festival is celebrated in Ladakh.
63 Microbes like Rhizobium, Nitrosomonas and Nitrobacter are used for nitrogen cycling.
64 In 1928 year did India make its Olympic debut in hockey.
65 There are 5 kingdom classification 1. monera 2. protista 3.Fungi 4. Plant  5.Animal. Discovered by Robert Whittaker.
    - Cell wall is present in plant,fungi,monera,protista but not present in Animal(thats why animal skin is soft).
66 Kho-kho was included as a demonstration sport at the Berlin 1936 Olympic Games and at the South Asian Federation (SAF) Games in Calcutta (Kolkata) in 1987.
67 ‘Nuakhai’ is the state festival of Odisha.
68 As per the definition of Census of India, a ‘marginal worker’ is a person who works for less than 183 days a YEAR.
69 Pacific plate is the largest crustal plate on Earth with an area of over 103,000,000 km square.
70 Bipin Singh opened 'Govindji Nartanalaya' dance school for women in Imphal and, in 1972, the 'Manipuri Nartanalaya' dance school in Calcutta.
71 At 14 degree North latitude does the easterly jet stream blow over peninsular India during the summer months.
72 In Madhya pradesh state governments  the Tansen Music Festival organized.
73 As of November 2024, there are 25 High Courts in India:
74 Harela is a festival of greenery, peace, prosperity, and environmental conservation, primarily celebrated in Uttarakhand.
75 Ustad Vilayat Ali Khan is a maestro in Sitar.
76 Tamil Nadu initiated the implementation of the Mid-day Meal scheme in elementary schools.
77 Ravi river is the transboundary river between India and Pakistan.
78 Mohiniyattam(from kerala) is associated with the lasya style of dance. The Hindu god Vishnu is associated with the this dance form Mohiniyattam.
79 National Sports University is situated in Manipur
80 ‘Sangken’ is a festival celebrated in Arunachal Pradesh by people of Buddhist religions.
81 The organisation that Comptroller and Auditor General heads is known as Indian Audit and Accounts Department 
82 The Mahalanobis model was the basis for Second Five-Year Plan.
83 ‘Kuki dance’ is a folk dance of India that is predominantly performed in Nagaland
84 The ‘Lokranjan’ festival celebrates the folk and tribal culture of Madhya Pradesh.

85 Iltutmish introduced two coins, namely silver tanka and copper jital?
86 Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar suggested the law that the British Government passed in 1856 to support widow remarriage.

87 Which writ is issued by a high court or supreme court when a lower court has considered a case going beyond its
jurisdiction? Prohibition

88 Highest point of Europe , Mt ELbrus , Russia. 
89 Mawsynrum which receives highest rainfall in the world is located in southern region of Khasi hills.
90 'Yakshagan' is a folk dance of Karnataka.
91  The first Indian Olympic Games was hosted by Lahore.
92  Subansiri, Jia Bharali, Dhansiri and Puthimari are the major tributaries of which river?
93  The Kisan Credit Card (KCC) is issued by Indian banks, including commercial banks, regional rural banks, and state co-operative banks. The KCC scheme is implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare, Government of India, in collaboration with the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) , started in 1998 , max 5 years , short term loan of 3 lac 
94  Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) is a component of Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) Scheme in which individuals with prior learning experience or skills are assessed and certified.


95 Mumbai CST is considered one of the first railway station in india.

96 Plagues vaccine is one of the first vaccine developed by india.

97. Kunwar Singh and Amar singh led the Indian Rebellion of 1857 in Bihar. He was nearly eighty and in failing health when he was called upon to take up arms.

98. Gandhji started ' Indian Opinion ' newspaper from south Africa.

99 The Bhagavati Sutra, also known as the Vyākhyāprajñapti, is a Jain text that is a large encyclopedia of Mahavira's teachings and life: 
 - The Bhagavati Sutra is a Jain text that is the fifth of the 12 Jain Angas
100. Assam, a beautiful state in northeastern India, is famously called the “Land of Red River and Blue Hills".Brahamputra-red river , Naga and patkai range-blue hills

101.Jhalrapatan, a historic city in the Jhalawar district of Rajasthan, is often called the “City of Bells.”
102. The Stockholm Convention on persistent organic pollutants calls for reduction or elimination of releases of POPs globally.
   - To date, 185 countries have ratified the Stockholm Convention and 34 POPs are listed as17 pesticides, 15 industrial chemicals, 7 unintentional by-products.
103. There are 19 zones ((including Metro Railway, Kolkata) on the Indian Railways and 70 divisions in the Indian Railway system. Each division is directed by a DRM or Divisional Railway Manager, who reports to the GM or General Manager of the zone.

104. Greenland was once a Danish colony and is now an autonomous province of Denmark. Highest Point: Gunnbjorn's Fjeld . Capital: Nuuk

105. rare earth elements are a set of seventeen metallic elements. These include the fifteen lanthanides on the periodic table plus scandium and yttrium.


106. Nishi tribes - Arunachal Pradesh

107. Cote d’Ivoire and Ghana are the two largest cocoa producers in the world, accounting for a significant portion of the global cocoa supply.

108. The Hundru Falls is located on the Subarnarekha River in the state of Jharkhand: 

109. According to historical records, the ancient Indian university most renowned for Nyaya (logic) was the University of Mithila. It was particularly famous for its teachings on Nyaya Sutras and logical sciences. 

110. The Planning Commission of India was set up by a Resolution of the Government of India in March 1950.

111. The verses used in which dances are taken from the Sanskrit play ‘Geet Govindam’? oddisi

112. Chanderi fabric came from the ancient town of Chanderi in Madhya Pradesh.

113. What is the name of the chariot of Lord Jagannath in the rath yatra of Lord Jagannath? nandighosh

114. On which subject is the legendary book ‘Mitakshara’ written by a scholar named Vigyaneshwar during the Sultanate era? Hindu Theology

115. Rama Shastri was a legendary jurist of whose time among the following? Madhavrao 

116. Literature named ‘Six Veda Sutras’ and ‘Char Mul Sutras’ are compatible with which religion? jainism

117. Who was the Chairman of the Provincial Constitution committee of the Constituent Assembly? sardar patel

118. The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), statutory organisation, was constituted in September, 1974 under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act.

119. Punjab has highest % of SC population.

120. Corbett is the first national park of India, established in 1936. It was named Hailey National Park then.

121. Inner Line permit states: ANMM(Arunachal , Nagaland , Mizoram , Manipur )

122. Calisto is Jupiter 2nd largest moon.

123. mithun or gayal is state animal of arunachal and hornbill is state bird of arunachal and kerala.

- The terrain is undulating with several valleys. The rivers Ramganga, Pallaen, and Sonanadi flow through the valleys.

124. Mathikettan Shola National Park : It is located in the southern part of the Palakkad Gap in the Western Ghats of Kerala.

125. Dhimsa Dance :It is a popular tribal dance performed by tribes, including Bagata, Valmiki, Poraja, Khond, Gadaba, Kondadora, Mukadora, Kotia in Andhra Pradesh .

126. International Big Cat Alliance : It was launched on 9th April 2023, during the event ‘Commemorating 50 years of Project Tiger’.

- A Council of at least 7 but not more than 15 member countries elected by the General Assembly for a term of 5 years, and a Secretariat.

127. Prasad scheme : Ministry of tourism , 41 cities in 25 states have been identified under the scheme.

128. Ranikhet Disease :It is a highly contagious viral disease that affects birds, particularly poultry such as chickens, turkeys, and ducks.

129. Lohtian island - sundarban -west bengal

130. "Glory of Allapalli" refers to a six-hectare patch of old-growth teak forests, designated as Maharashtra's first Biodiversity Heritage Site, located in the Gadchiroli district, near Allapalli, and known for its rich flora, including over 130 species.

131. UP has highest number of archaeological sites and TN has maximum number of Ramsar sites.

132. Article 343 of the Indian Constitution declares Hindi in Devanagari script as the official language of the Union.

133. GI tag is issued by Department of Industry Promotion and Internal Trade (DIPIT) within the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.

* Uttar Pradesh is the leading state in highest number of GI-tagged products followed by Tamil Nadu.

134. Bru or reang community indigenous tribe of Tripura , Mizoram ,Assam

135. Washintog - Potamala ,Paris - Seine river , Sydney - Darling river

136. Blue mountains are highest peak of mizo hills present in Manipur.

137. State animal of Sikkim is red panda.

138. The Atal Setu, also known as the Mumbai Trans Harbour Link (MTHL)is the longest sea bridge of India. It has a length of 21.8 kilometers.

139. Lingaraj temple was built by King yayayti of soma vansh.

140. 24 degree North latitude passes through maximum Indian states.

141. Dawki river also known as umngoit river is in Meghalaya.

142. Mawmluh cave and Therriaghat, Sobhar in East Khasi Hill District - All in meghalaya

143. Smallest ihhabited island in Brahamaputra river is Umananda

144. Seymour island is in Antarctica.

145. Umlingla pass located in Ladakh.

146. Indian ocean was earlier known as Eastern Ocean.

147. The Subansiri River is also known as the Gold River. This name is derived from the presence of gold dust in the river's waters, particularly in the Lower Subansiri District of Arunachal Pradesh. It's a major tributary of the Brahmaputra River.

148. The highest motorable road in the world is the Umling La Pass in Ladakh, India.

149. Khardung La Pass is famously known as the gateway to the Nubra and Shyok valleys in the Ladakh in Jammu and Kashmir.

150. The nickname "Black Pearl" is most famously associated with the legendary Brazilian soccer (football) player, Pelé

151.Gunpowder is a mixture of potassium nitrate, charcoal, and sulfur. The typical composition is about 75% potassium nitrate, 15% charcoal, and 10% sulfur.

152. Vizhinjam, India's first transshipment port, receives its first container ship , located in kerala.

153. Yellow sea is bordered by mainland China in the north and west and by North Korea and South Korea in the east.

154. Caste enumeration began in 1881 under british rule , 1931 census was the last official enumeration of all castes and their numbers.

155. Indonesia is shifting its capital from Jakarta to Nusantara due to land subsidence.

156. Central building research institute is located in Roorkee Uttarakhand.

157. Man booker prize was renamed as booker prize in 2002.

158. 8th five year plan came in 1992 with liberalization reforms.

159. The Kandariya Mahadeva Temple at Khajuraho was built by the Chandela dynasty. Specifically, it was constructed by King Dhangadeva in 999 CE.




   // Festivals and Dances forms

1. Goa( Folk dance )  - Fugdi

2  Goa( Cultural Festival )  - Shigmo

3. Rottela Panduga or the Roti Festival is celebrated in Andhra Pradesh.

4. Vishu festival is celebrated in Kerala and Tamilnadu

5. Nagaland (Cultural Festivals) - Hornbill

6. Nagaland (Folk Dance) -'Leshalaptu', ' Rengma'  'bamboo dance'

7. 'Hola Mohalla' is a festival associated with Sikh religion/belief.

8. Herath Festival - Kashimiri pandity community

 J & K (Dance ) - Rouf , bhand pather
 
9. Karnataka (Dance) - Yakshagan

9.1 Karnataka (Cultural Festivals) -

10. Assam(Festival) - Gamocha

11. Assam(Dance) - Bihu ,

12. Maharastra (Festival) -

13. Maharastra (Dance) - Lavani

14. Manipur (Dance) - Jagoli

15. Manipur (Festival) -  Ningol Chakkouba

16. TamilNadu (Cultural Festivals) - Thaipusam

17. TamilNadu (Folk Dance ) -

18. Himachal Pradesh (Cultural Festivals) -

19. Himachal Pradesh (Fold Dance ) - Nati

20. Mizoram (Cultural Festivals) -

21. Mizoram (Folk Dance) - Cheraw (Bamboo dance)


22. Telangana (Cultural festival) - Bathukamma 

23. Telangana (Dance) - 
